Sam Mendes’s 1917 is an amazingly audacious film; as exciting as a heist movie, disturbing as a sci-fi nightmare. Working with co-writer Krysty Wilson-Cairns, he has created a first world war drama of the Western Front and a terrible journey undertaken by two boys like a ghost train ride into a day-lit house of horror, periodically descending into night and then resurfacing into an alien world, bright with menace. And it’s filmed in one extraordinary single take by cinematographer Roger Deakins, a continuous fluid travelling shot (with digital edits sneaked in, evidently at those moments where we lose sight of them, or in moments of darkness or explosion – but where exactly, I mostly couldn’t tell) . Mendes shows us what these soldiers see and sometimes wheels the camera around so we can see them seeing it: a gruelling odyssey whose trench scenes are perhaps intended to recall Kubrick’s Paths of Glory – and later our stricken hero enunciates a panicky line in the midst of his terrified comrades that reminded me of something similar from Apocalypse Now: “Where’s your commanding officer?” (The single-take horror also reminded me of the TV director in that film, frantically telling the numbed grunts not to look at the camera. I wonder if this might have inspired Mendes?) The situation is that Blake (Dean-Charles Chapman) and Schofield (George MacKay) are lance corporals – and messengers. These men, like the rest of their company, have been lulled into a false sense of security by what appears to have been a German retreat, and an imminent “big push” from the Allied forces to clinch victory. But the gruff General (Colin Firth) tells them that aerial photo reconnaissance has disclosed that so far from having retreated, the Germans have simply withdrawn to a position where they are better defended, luring their enemy onward into a trap. Now another British division is about to advance into certain slaughter. Field telephone communication having been cut off, the only way to tell them to call off their attack is via messenger. And so these two shivering soldiers have to make their way across no man’s land, across the abandoned German lines, through (supposedly) vacated German territory and as far as the advancing Allied troops. Blake and Schofield travel through a postapocalyptic landscape, a bad dream of broken tree stumps, mud lakes left by shell craters, dead bodies, rats. And then when they stumble into the German trenches, they discover how much better built they are, and how much better quipped, trained and led the Germans are – and how much they are more likely to win. But they must carry on, and Mendes and Deakins convey, along with these men’s sense of futility and fear, the strange nausea and exhilaration that Blake and Schofield feel, the nihilist elation that comes with the moment-by-moment experience of survival, fiercely holding on to life with every eardrum-splitting sniper shot. But ahead of them lies chaos and loss. The most extraordinary sequence comes when a German airman crash lands almost on top of Blake and Schofield and there is a moment of simple human compassion when the German staggers out of his blazing craft, dying and begging for water. Schofield runs to get him some from a rusty pump and behind his back – behind the audience’s backs – the story’s most fateful event occurs, off camera. It’s a staggeringly bold bit of storytelling, and it comes off. The single-take technique fascinatingly creates a kind of theatrical effect: the spectacle of two people moving through an unbroken space. It is immersive, yes, but that overused word does not quite convey the paradoxical alienation that is being created: the distance, the pure strangeness. The two men’s experiences are bizarre and shocking, but a poignant and then tragic sympathy is finally dredged up from the mud of their ordeal. 1917 is Mendes’s most purely ambitious and passionate picture since his misunderstood and underappreciated Jarhead of 2005. It’s bold, thrilling film-making. • 1917 is released in the US on 25 December, in Australia on 7 January 2020 and in the UK on 10 January 2020.
Kristen Stewart gives a heartfelt performance as actor Jean Seberg, harassed by the FBI for supporting the Black Panthers Utterly committed … Kristen Stewart as Jean Seberg and Anthony Mackie as activist Hakim Jamal. Utterly committed … Kristen Stewart as Jean Seberg and Anthony Mackie as activist Hakim Jamal. Photograph: Landmark Media/Alamy Stock Photo Probably no movie actress suffered more from a combination of misogynist Hollywood politics and reactionary Washington politics than Jean Seberg. The star of Jean-Luc Godard’s Breathless suffered years of harassment and surveillance from the FBI for supporting the Black Panthers in the late 1960s, all of which contributed to her depression and was a factor in Seberg taking her own life in 1979. The tragic drama of Seberg’s life should make her a great biopic subject, particularly its amazingly symbolic early episode in which, playing Joan of Arc for Otto Preminger in 1957, she underwent a terrifying near martyrdom tied to the stake when the arrogant and reckless director allowed real flames to get too close to her. And yet the disparate episodes of her life are tricky to encompass dramatically, and a 1983 stage musical, Jean Seberg, for London’s National Theatre with music by Marvin Hamlisch, was a notorious flop. Now there is this flawed account from screenwriters Joe Shrapnel and Anna Waterhouse and directed by Benedict Andrews. The movie features a heartfelt and utterly committed performance from Kristen Stewart, who is as plausible in the role of Seberg as anyone could be, and the drama homes in on that period in her life when she supported the Black Panthers and had a relationship with activist Hakim Jamal (Anthony Mackie). But this film also finds it necessary, in the apparent interests of liberal balance, to invent a fictional young FBI officer Jack Solomon (Jack O’Connell) who is decent, sensitive, appalled at what his organisation is doing to Seberg and makes a muddled attempt to warn her. But why? Why invent this character at all? Why make the travails of this made-up man dramatically equivalent to Seberg’s very real ordeal? It is a strange contrivance and the film never quite rings true. • Seberg is released in the UK on 10 January and in Australia on 30 January.
Now 90 and still a vigorously engaged public figure, the midnight-movie magus, comic-book artist and tarot enthusiast Alejandro Jodorowsky has become the touchstone for a certain kind of untamed cinema, the last survivor-practitioner of underground freaky radicalism, standing up to corporate blandness with his countercultural film-making. A remarkable late-flowering of creativity recently brought us his highly personal films The Dance of Reality (2013) and Endless Poetry (2016). Now we can see his 1970 breakthrough, El Topo (The Mole), which is on rerelease. Influenced by Sergio Leone, Tod Browning, Luis Buñuel and (worryingly) Charles Manson, it’s a bizarre head-trip festival of occult psychedelia, heatstroke visuals, Age-of-Aquarius nude dancing and violence through poster-paint fake blood splattered about the place. After seeing El Topo in 1970, Jodorowsky superfan John Lennon famously promoted and yet also stymied this film-maker’s career, encouraging his manager Allen Klein to invest in Jodorowsky’s future productions, an involvement that bogged the director down in legal and commercial wrangling and did much to cause the effective disappearance, which fed into his mythic reputation. Jodorowsky stars as the black-clad horseman, riding through a stark western desert with a small, naked boy riding behind him: his son, played by his actual son, Brontis, who was to make an appearance in much of the great man’s subsequent work and whose presence here underlines the film’s Freudian theme of self-actualisation through parricide. The rider and his boy have a horrifying encounter with the aftermath of a cult slaying, and then, through his sexual experience with a mysterious woman, the rider embarks on a mission in the wilderness like Jesus or Moses, vowing to travel through the desert, taking on four bandit gunmen. He then abandons his boy to Franciscan monks and, after renouncing violence, is carried off by mutants to a cave from which he must, mole-like, tunnel out, finally to face his now-grownup son. After 50 years, El Topo does not stand up quite as well to its original legendary status. It is perhaps a little too infatuated with violence and grotesquerie, and, unlike Leone, Jodorowsky sometimes gives the impression that he doesn’t really believe in the ideas of good or bad or ugly, and these ideas – as well as any character in El Topo – are just tarot cards to be reshuffled and dealt in any order, although there is a fascination in the very opaque quality of that symbolism. His evocation of the desert is fascinating, as a blank canvas to showcase bizarre dreamlike figures of the mind: Ciro Guerra’s Birds of Passage is, I think, indebted to El Topo. The Mansonesque cult horror scenes are what locate El Topo in its era: the jaded, paranoid fag-end of the 60s, with pleasure and love coagulating into violence and machismo. These are still disturbing moments, especially that bizarre crucified goat, and it’s hilarious (but also unhilarious and cruel) to see that genuinely dangerous non-CGI lion pacing and turning in the background of one shot, clearly being wrangled by someone off-screen to the right. And what does it all mean? In so much as it means anything, it is about that circular, spiralling journey that El Topo said he would have to take through the desert to find all four of the gunmen he would need to conquer. In his end is his beginning, and his son’s beginning. Best viewed at midnight. • El Topo is rereleased in the UK on 10 January.
New Zealand director says he never set out to make a movie everyone loved Taika Waititi on the Jojo Rabbit film set Jojo Rabbit writer-director Taika Waititi on the film set. The movie has earned six Academy Award nominations. Photograph: Kimberly French/Fox Searchlight Pictures via AP Taika Waititi, the New Zealand film-maker behind the “anti-hate” Nazi satire Jojo Rabbit, says the movie’s six Oscar nominations have vindicated the risks he took in making the controversial film. “I never wanted to make something that was very easy, because for me, if it’s too easy, then what’s the point?” Waititi told Deadline. “Sometimes people say, ‘Oh, it’s divisive,’ but where I come from, ‘divisive’ is not a swearword. It’s a means to create discussion.” Jojo Rabbit is a second world war-era film telling the story of a 10-year-old German boy named Jojo, a member of Hitler youth whose imaginary friend is Adolf Hitler himself, who discovers that his mother is hiding a Jewish girl in the family’s home. It was nominated for the Academy Awards’ prestigious best picture category in Tuesday’s announcement, along with nods for best adapted screenplay, film editing, costume design and production design. Scarlett Johansson, who plays Jojo’s mother, received a best supporting actress nomination. It is the most nominations for a New Zealand film-maker since Peter Jackson’s final Lord of the Rings film, which won all 11 Oscars it was nominated for in 2004. In the film, Hitler, played by Waititi, is a comedic buffoon, a decision Waititi defended in an interview with the Guardian in December. “Comedy has always, for thousands and thousands of years, been a way of connecting audiences and delivering more profound messages by disarming them and opening them up to receive those messages,” he said. “Comedy is a way more powerful tool than just straight drama, because with drama, people tend to switch off or feel a sense of guilt or leave feeling depressed … Often it doesn’t sit with them as much as a comedy does.” The film, based on Christine Leunen’s book Caging Skies, won the people’s choice award at the Toronto international film festival in September – sometimes a predictor of Oscars success – but polarised critics. Jojo Rabbit received one- and two-star reviews in the Guardian and three stars from the Observer, with reviewers calling it “intensely unfunny”, “smug” and “oddly indecisive”. Rolling Stone labelled the film “deeply affecting” and “near impossible to shake” in a three and a half-star review. “I think it’s pretty loved, actually. There’s not many of those people taking offence,” Waititi told the Guardian in December. “I didn’t want to make a film that every single person loved and thought was a charming, whimsical tale about a boy that finds a girl in his attic.” Waititi, the film-maker behind Thor: Ragnarok and What We Do in the Shadows, told the Wrap it was “an incredible honour” to be nominated. “It’s a once-in-a-lifetime thing for me,” he said. “My films are never really part of the conversation so, yeah, for this film to get its nominations is massive.” In 2005 Waititi received his first Oscar nomination for the short film Two Cars, One Night.
Congratulations to those men – I guess? Issa Rae summarised the mixed feelings of many when yet another all-male list of best director Oscar nominations was announced yesterday. It’s possible to note – entirely without snide – that it has been a bumper year for films about men by men. The frontrunners – Quentin Tarantino’s Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, Martin Scorsese’s The Irishman, Sam Mendes’ 1917, and even Todd Phillips’ Joker – provided plentiful and pertinent insights into male power, male ego and male fallibility. But what about the rest of us? We must content ourselves with Little Women, the lone female-directed film on the best picture list, for, as Aunt March would counsel, that is our lot in life. After decades of being mischaracterised as a cosy tale about sweet-natured sisters and their domestic trifles, Louisa May Alcott’s sardonically titled Little Women finally has a faithful adaptation. Under Greta Gerwig’s passionate direction, it rages righteously about the patriarchy’s narrow definition of artistic merit – amusingly embodied by Tracy Letts’ belittling publisher, Dashwood – and how it works to crush female creativity. How apt. Does Oscars 2020 feel like a pendulum swing back to the bad old days before women were allowed creativity, or interiority, or speaking parts? Not even. In truth, female film-makers have never been properly acknowledged by the Academy. Only five women have been nominated for a best director award in the Academy Awards’s 92-year history and only one – Kathryn Bigelow for The Hurt Locker – has won. On the most recent occasion when a woman was nominated, it was the same woman: Gerwig again for Lady Bird in 2017. Is Hollywood operating a “one-in-one-out” policy for female film-makers? These stats do obscure progress of a sort. In Oscar terms, Bigelow was the Gerwig of the 00s, and she had to explosively out-testosterone Hollywood’s big boys with films such as The Hurt Locker and Zero Dark Thirty just to get a look in. Gerwig has been nominated for pictures that emphatically tell women’s stories. And yet, is it too much to ask that the Oscars acknowledge not just one female story every few years, but a multiplicity, every year? Because it’s not as if the films aren’t there. Female-directed films now come in more shapes and sizes than a body-positive catwalk show. This year’s could’ve-should’ve-been-contenders include Lulu Wang, Marielle Heller, Céline Sciamma, Lorena Scafaria, Mati Diop and Melina Matsoukas. Why don’t they count? It’s not as if the Academy is ignoring calls to diversify. Intake numbers increased year-on-year between 2015 and 2018, and overall female membership went from 25% to 31% in the same period. Some genres such as documentary have achieved gender parity, and this is sometimes reflected in Academy Award nominees. This year, four out of five films on the best documentary list have a female director or co-director. Sometimes, but not always. Oscars 2020 demonstrates that diversity drives will only get us so far. Industry types, critics and ordinary filmgoers still all have to interrogate our assumptions about what makes a film award-worthy. If Ford v Ferrari receives nominations, why not Hustlers? If Marriage Story, why not The Farewell? If Parasite, why not Portrait of a Lady on Fire? Internalised prejudice means everyone, male and female, has a Dashwood in their head, scoffing at the very notion that female experience might be just as valid as male experience. But Jo March didn’t let him get the better of her – and neither should we.
If cinema had the impact on the world that film critics insisted they did in 2019, Joker would have brought about an incel revolution, and Little Women would have ended misogyny. It was not a great year for film, with even our greatest film-makers putting out middling efforts. Yet if you listen to the critics and official opinion-havers online, you could have been convinced that it was a very important year for film. Issue movies took on an outsized influence, and movies that just tried to be movies – entertaining, thought-provoking or pleasurable – were denounced or celebrated as being dangerous or culturally momentous. The stakes this year for every film seemed impossibly high. This was the year police departments issued warnings about the possibility of mass shootings at opening-night screenings of Joker, after all. It was a hysteria that built online after film critics saw the movie at festivals and started to complain it somehow “glamorized” or sympathized with violent incels. (I always thought one of the best things cinema was capable of doing was of sympathizing with the marginalized and misunderstood, but I guess that viewpoint is out of fashion now.) This was also the year media outlets like the New York Times and Vanity Fair insisted Little Women was mandatory viewing to prove you’re not a misogynist. Even GQ ran a piece implying how important it was men “support women” by watching this film about some white ladies having a hard time during the civil war. Men’s supposed lack of interest in Little Women became the dominant narrative of the movie, implying it reveals the (alleged) lack of interest men have, in the words of the New York Times, in “see[ing] women as human beings”. It couldn’t possibly be that Little Women is just a bad movie – although it is. Little Women is one of those books that has been over-adapted, with five previous film adaptations, plus a miniseries, plus a theatrical production, plus an anime version, and on and on. The book itself is sentimental and sloppy, although interesting in the way it portrays hardship and deprivation. Its mediocrity makes mysterious its continued cultural dominance. Somehow the version adapted and directed by Greta Gerwig ramps up the sentimentality and strips the story of anything of interest. In her version, poverty looks glamorous, advocacy means just having the right opinions, and there are no consequences for anyone’s actions. At one point, I slid so far down in my chair to avoid looking at the screen and the incredibly painful things that were happening – painful to me, not to the characters – that I was nearly sitting on the floor. But if you insist that a movie is important, you don’t really have to deal with whether or not it’s good. You can shame people into seeing it as a political statement, rather than as an entertainment or cultural selection. Same with the “dangerous” or “disturbing” moniker, which got used on everything from Joker to the latest Quentin Tarantino film Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood, which was marked down for everything from not giving its female co-star Margot Robbie enough lines to its gratuitous violence against a female would-be murderer to its filming of women’s feet (fetishes are now dangerous, I guess). If a critic doesn’t like a film, labeling it as dangerous – and implying you might get killed if you go see it – is an attempt to keep people away. Part of this language is the result of our commenting culture choosing to see everything through a political lens. There must be a political reason for Tarantino giving so few lines to a female actor in his latest film, and that political reason must be he does not respect or have any interest in women. There must be a political reason this movie doesn’t have the correct number of roles given to actors of color, and that reason must be that the director is racist. Even the female director of a terrible Charlie’s Angels reboot tried to blame the audience’s lack of interest in “women’s stories” for its failure. You know, just the totally normal and relatable stories of regular women fighting crime in very short shorts. But another reason for this rhetorical madness is the loss of authority the average cultural critic has with the movie-going audience. There’s always been a divide between what the critical culture celebrates and what audience members actually want to see. “This three-and-a-half-hour Turkish film about the struggle between a boy and his father is a heartrending exploration of generational divides among a swiftly changing world …” “I don’t know, does anything blow up?” But that divide seems to be growing, with almost no living critic able to wield the kind of power figures like Siskel and Ebert used to have to get butts in seats, even so-called difficult films or subtitled films or art films. Not only to make an audience show up, but to increase demand enough that distributors increased the number of screens a film like My Dinner with Andre might be shown on. Now no one really cares what a random freelancer at Vulture really thinks about a movie, so critics compete to use the most hyperbolic language possible to attract attention. “Adam Sandler is God-Level” in Uncut Gems, screeched a critic I’ve never heard of at ScreenCrush. “The cinematic equivalent of mixing cocaine with acid.” “The year’s most exciting film.” And of course there are multiple political takes, telling us how important it is for us to see it so we can better understand something about capitalism. And you know what? It was pretty good. Adam Sandler was pretty good in it. I was bored for most of it, and angry for having had high hopes for this film by all of the ravishing critical praise, but yeah I guess it was pretty good, all things considered. Nothing more than that. Other movies that had been called transformative and perfect and so important this year included Us, Midsommar, and the HBO show Watchmen, all of which also had significant gaps between the critics scores and the audience scores on Rotten Tomatoes. But browbeating audience members into seeing films by telling them it’s politically important or by swearing this is the most intense and perfect cinematic experience they’ll ever have doesn’t really work, and it only helps their authority slip further away. And while there are political ramifications to our entertainment – whose stories get told and whose do not is a political issue – the issue is not with the audience but a broken system of film production and distribution, a disappearance of a significant proportion of film history from streaming services, and a lack of good critical writing that helps deepen an audience member’s intellectual engagement with what they are watching. “Morals don’t sell nowadays,” a mean old male publisher tells poor little Jo March in Little Women as he decimates her short story before publishing it. I wish film critics would understand that is still true. The year before, in 2018, it was Black Panther we all “had to see”, for political reasons, of course. Its success was heralded as a political victory, not only for its black cast and director, but for all of humanity. Saudi Arabia has been showing Black Panther in its theaters, too – the first commercially released film to be screened in almost 35 years in this repressive, autocratic regime. And that’s a political victory too. For the repressive, autocratic regime, of course. Because as revolutionary as Black Panther was hailed as being in America, it is ultimately the story of a monarchy triumphing over the challenge presented by a rebellious force. It turns out that it makes for good propaganda for the Saudi monarchy. Oh, the irony.
The Star Wars fan has been immortalised in a visual dictionary as Ri-Lee Howell, Jedi master and historian Riley Howell, 21, was killed after he tackled a gunman who opened fire in a classroom at the University of North Carolina-Charlotte Riley Howell (right) was killed after he tackled a gunman who opened fire in a classroom school shooting at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte. The 21-year-old Star Wars fan has now been honored as a Jedi. Photograph: Matthew Westmoreland/AP A college student hailed by police as a hero for preventing more injuries and deaths after a gunman opened fire in a classroom has been immortalized as a Jedi by the production company behind the Star Wars franchise. News outlets report the family of Riley Howell, the University of North Carolina at Charlotte student who is described as a huge Star Wars fan, was tipped off by Lucasfilm in May that it planned to honor him in a forthcoming book, Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker - The Visual Dictionary. The book was released by publisher DK to coincide with the release of the new film Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker. In May, the fan relations team for Lucasfilm wrote a letter to Howell’s family expressing condolences. “Riley’s courage and selflessness brings out the Jedi in all of us,” wrote fan relations team member Lucas Seastrom. “We hope that you may rejoice in his memory, and we join you in honoring his life and example. “As a small tribute, our Story Group has incorporated a reimagining of Riley’s name as a character in the Star Wars galaxy.” The entry in the book credits Jedi master and historian “Ri-Lee Howell” with collecting “many of the earliest accounts of exploration and codifications of The Force”. Riley Howell’s mother, Natalie Henry-Howell, told the Charlotte Observer that her son would have loved the idea. “I like the way they actually left his last name,” Henry-Howell said. “I think he would really be appreciative of that. Because, you know, they could have just said Ri-Lee – Jedi Ri-Lee – and we’d be guessing the whole time about whether or not that was really [him], but they put his last name in there just to really honor him ... and that really made me cry when I heard about it.” The family went to see the new movie on opening night. They brought his ashes and left a seat open for him. “I think he would have liked the way it ended,” Henry-Howell said. Howell, 21, and a classmate died on 30 April when a gunman opened fire in a classroom in the Kennedy building on UNCC’s campus. Four other students were injured, but police say Howell’s actions prevented more injuries or loss of life. “You’re either going to run, hide and shield, or you’re going to take the fight to the assailant,” Charlotte-Mecklenburg police department Chief Kerr Putney said. “Having no place to run and hide, he did the last.” Lauren Westmoreland, Howell’s longtime girlfriend, said in an email that Jedis were close to his heart. “Though he wasn’t an artist, he loved to draw the clone trooper helmets all the time, sometimes even on my birthday cards,” Westmoreland said. Lauren’s father, Kevin Westmoreland, said Howell studied the Star Wars universe for most of his life. “He had a very strong sense of good and evil, and how to live life as someone who looked out for others,” Westmoreland said. “Seeing him listed as both a Jedi and a historian in Star Wars lore is a perfect way to connect him to this story and the characters he loved.” 
A winding road. Two bickering siblings in a cemetery. And a dark-suited, silver-haired zombie. The immortal opening minutes of the 1968 film Night of the Living Dead are unfolding onscreen at Leeds Playhouse. Meanwhile, scattered around the stage beneath, a small team work furiously, switching between the jobs of actor and camera operator. A second, adjacent screen above them reveals the results of their efforts to recreate, live and in real time, every shot in George Romero’s classic horror movie. With more than 1,000 shots in Romero’s film, it’s clear that the company, imitating the dog, have their hands full with Night of the Living Dead – Remix. As the technical team watch from the stalls in this first week of full rehearsal, actor William James Holstead is playing the ill-fated Johnny, who is gnawed by a zombie in that opening graveyard scene. But Holstead soon shrugs off that role and wheels a camera around to capture footage projected through a live feed. Moments later, he’s abandoned the camera and is playing one of the flesh-eaters. The actors take a break while some technical glitches are ironed out and Matt Prendergast paces the auditorium perfecting his Robert Kennedy impression. Kennedy’s speech announcing the assassination of Martin Luther King in 1968 is part of a collage of news reports that will frame the familiar story of a group in a farmhouse facing down zombies. King’s relevance will be immediately obvious to anyone who has seen the original film, which is steeped in the racial tensions of the era and ends with the black hero, Ben (played by Duane Jones), being shot dead by a white man. The film’s closing credits, featuring a series of close-up images of Ben’s dead body, are strikingly akin to photojournalism. Archive images and newsreel footage will be projected and abstracted on stage, and events from the Chicago riots to John F Kennedy’s assassination and the Vietnam war may all be referenced. This is similar to the company’s previous production, Heart of Darkness, which revisited both Joseph Conrad’s novella and Francis Ford Coppola’s film Apocalypse Now, adding speeches by Patrice Lumumba and Franz Stangl to the mix. Simon Wainwright, imitating the dog’s lead video designer, points out that Romero had only recently completed the film when King was killed. Director Andrew Quick explains that the film itself is “shot in that sort of quasi-documentary style – black and white, grainy, slightly amateurish. So you feel: ‘Are these real people? Are they actors?’” Quick first saw Night of the Living Dead in a late-night horror double-bill at the Scala cinema in London. He was struck by “how much more of an art film it was, how much more complex than I imagined it would be. I’d seen other zombie films which were more conventional and schlockier.” Romero’s film would provide a new template for horror and inspire a new wave of American independent cinema. There is a parallel between Romero and his small band of outsiders, whose experimental, low-budget film held a mirror to modern society, and Wainwright and Quick’s own experiment, where the news references may be 50 years old but reverberate in our age of intolerance. The starting point, however, was an altogether different horror film: Psycho. Wainwright explains that they played around with remaking the Hitchcock classic but couldn’t get the rights. Living Dead reared its head because of its unusual copyright situation. It was originally named Night of the Flesh Eaters but when the title was changed for distribution, the copyright notice in the film was mistakenly omitted. The movie ended up in the public domain. The production company behind the film, Image Ten, have authorised this stage version. As part of his research, Quick interviewed Russ Streiner, the actor who played Johnny and was one of the original producers. Quick, who is co-directing the show with Pete Brooks, wants to steep the show in the film’s own production history. They are experimenting with meta techniques, such as actors reading out scholarly writings about the movie and offering behind-the-scenes stories, giving a strange parallel with the DVD commentary format. There’s a comic potential to these asides and Wainwright acknowledges the impulse to embrace the absurdity of the whole undertaking. There is an inherent wit, he says, in this Herculean task. “But we’re wary of pushing the humour too far.” Some scenes will be shot using model sets, with defaced Barbie dolls cast as zombies. In rehearsals, they continue their discussions from the previous day about how to approach the scene in which Johnny’s sister, Barbara, slaps Ben and he punches her. Actor Morven Macbeth explains: “Duane Jones spoke to George Romero and Russ Streiner about the significance of a black man punching a white woman, [suggesting] that they hadn’t thought it through sufficiently.” It’s possible that this background detail will be shared with audiences in the final version. Morgan Bailey is playing Ben and says he has to balance mimicking the performance of Jones, as seen on screen above him, while giving his own portrayal of the character. “There has to be an element of you mirroring the actor and the choices that were made in the movie. But at the same time, as a performer, you want to give your own personal stamp.” Macbeth acknowledges that, moment to moment on stage: “There is a lot to think about! In a conventional stage play you have to remember your lines, remember where you’re supposed to stand and your character’s arc in that scene. In this, you’re also thinking about your relationship to the camera, operating a camera, preparing for the next shot. You’re hearing the lines and the soundtrack in your ear.” It’s unlike any other acting gig, says Bailey. “What really threw me is the choreography – it’s more of a dance.” Everyone is striving to stay in sync and the original film acts as a sort of metronome for them. Quick draws a contrast between the world on stage and what we see them create on the screen: “The actors have to move in very unnatural ways, to create a very natural moment on film.” Moreover, adds Wainwright, they need to make sure that the movements of the characters on stage are interesting in themselves, rather than just serving the purpose of capturing the film. As they approach opening night and a five-week tour, Quick already has his mind on their next show, which will have a similarly sophisticated interweaving of storylines. It’s an adaptation of Lady Chatterley’s Lover that will include the story of the trial and also explore issues around the enactment of sex on stage and screen in the #MeToo era. Quick says that the heart of his productions is found in this collision of multiple story strands and styles. He points from his seat in the stalls at the melee of cameras and actors: “It’s the relationship between those two screens and the vibrancy of the stage.” The company is named after a painting by the American artist Eric Fischl. “A lot of our work has been about imitation,” explains Quick. “A lot of theatre is. You repeat and imitate what you do in rehearsal or the sources you’re looking at.” But the canine is key. “Dogs are out of control,” he says with a smile. “You can’t imitate a dog.” Night of the Living Dead – Remix is at Leeds Playhouse, 24 January-15 February. Then touring until 21 March.
The actor and former bodybuilder will be sworn in on Thursday to recruit officers for the department and the county Lou Ferrigno, who played the Incredible Hulk in the 1970s television series, is slated to become a sheriff’s deputy in New Mexico. Lou Ferrigno, who played the Incredible Hulk in the 1970s television series, is slated to become a sheriff’s deputy in New Mexico. Photograph: Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP As the Incredible Hulk, Lou Ferrigno brought the bad guys to book with his famous thunderclap, a signature superhero move as loud as a sonic boom or a hurricane. But the actor most famous for bringing the Marvel Comics legend to life in the long-running 1970s CBS television series will have to rely on more traditional crime-fighting tools in his latest role, as a sheriff’s deputy in the New Mexico desert. The 68-year-old former bodybuilder will be sworn in on Thursday as the newest recruit of the Socorro county sheriff’s department. As a deputy, Ferrigno will continue a journey in law and order that began as the ferocious green alter ego of Dr David Bruce Banner on the small screen and progressed to real-life spells as a reserve deputy in two California counties … and as a member of notorious Arizona sheriff Joe Arpaio’s volunteer posse which targeted illegal immigrants. According to Socorro county sheriff William Armijo, Ferrigno will be instrumental in recruiting officers for the department and the county. The actor, Armijo says, will be “bringing decades of law enforcement experience”. Expected to perform mostly office-bound duties, Ferrigno will be on call to assist patrol officers where needed, though he will wear the neat beige uniform of the sheriff’s department rather than the torn shorts and pea green body make-up of the giant Hulk. Since stepping back from an acting career that still sees him accepting occasional roles, such as voice-overs in the Avengers series of movies, Ferrigno has enjoyed success as a fitness coach and motivational speaker. In an interview on his website, he explained the parallels between life as a fictional crime-buster and his time with the San Luis Obispo sheriff’s department in California. “This is not a costume,” he said. “This is the real thing because I’ve played sheriff over the years in different films. This I take very seriously and I’m very excited, very proud to be a deputy because my whole life I’ve always wanted to be a sheriff. “People assume it’s just an honorary thing. It isn’t, because I’m certified and I have police powers which I’m very proud of. I went through all the driving, the shooting, the studying and it changed my life and I’m very happy to be a real-life hero, protecting life and property.” During an appearance on The Celebrity Apprentice in 2012, Ferrigno struck up a friendship with Donald Trump. In 2018 Trump appointed Ferrigno, a former Mr Universe, to his presidential council on sports fitness and nutrition. Ferrigno is among a number of celebrities to have had careers in law enforcement. They include the actor Steven Seagal, who partnered his duties as a reserve deputy in Louisiana and Arizona with a reality TV series that was halted when he became embroiled in a sexual assault lawsuit, and the retired basketball star Shaquille O’Neal. An honorary federal deputy marshal, O’Neal attended police academy and served as a reserve officer for police departments in California, Arizona and Florida.
The Oscar nominations arrive, signalling almost the final iteration of that strange awardsthink consensus: at once exasperating and eerie, choices which somehow emerge as if from a single head. The raucous box-office smash Joker, the origins story for Batman’s arch-villain, leads the field with 11 nominations, and 10 each for Sam Mendes’s first world war spectacular 1917, Martin Scorsese’s wintry mob drama The Irishman and Quentin Tarantino’s LA black comedy Once Upon a Time in Hollywood. Once again, we have an all-male directing shortlist (with nothing for Greta Gerwig’s superlative Little Women or Marielle Heller for A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood), and only Cynthia Erivo making the list as a non-white actor, with nothing for Lupita Nyong’o’s much-admired performance in Jordan Peele’s Us. It is infuriating, too, that the Safdie brothers’ glorious crime drama Uncut Gems did not make the cut; Taron Egerton must be disappointed to get nothing for his game impersonation of Elton John in Rocketman (although it was always a better singing than acting performance) and Awkwafina certainly should have been included. This Academy Awards list is duller without her. There is a lot to feel good about in #Oscars2020: Cats didn’t figure, and all three films in the silver medal “10 nominations” position, 1917, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood and The Irishman are absolutely superb. Each in their various ways sparkle with ingenuity, flair, thrills, audacity and humanity. It is very good to see Bong Joon-ho’s smart satire Parasite from South Korea doing so well, though here again – at the risk of heresy – I have to raise an eyebrow at the way this film, like Yorgos Lanthimos’s The Favourite last year, has snared the excitable “connoisseur talking point” vote. Other international films like Wang Xiaoshwai’s So Long, My Son and Kantemir Balagov’s Beanpole simply haven’t shown up on the Oscar radar. But squatting on everything is Joker: in my view, a mediocre and overrated film which runs out of story ideas after the first act and which has less interest than the viral video of the Portsmouth kebab shop fight. It certainly deserves its cinematography nomination for Laurence Sher (but bizarrely, it got nothing for the excellent production design by Mark Friedberg). But almost everything else about it is meagre and shallow, and the strident lead performance from Joaquin Phoenix is much less interesting than similar portrayals in You Were Never Really Here and The Master. Tarantino’s Once Upon a Time In Hollywood, for all that it is arguably self-indulgent and provocative, at least has the courage of its bizarre counter-factual convictions; it maintains a story momentum up to and including its delirious and stomach-turning finale and it is passionately engaged with its time and place, and with cinema itself. Mendes’s amazingly bold single-shot rendering of a story on the western front has now been out long enough for its technical expertise to be somehow held against it in some quarters; the fact that at key moments the screen fades to black is held somehow to invalidate the single-shot effect. For me the going down into darkness and then up into light is a vital part of its vision. It is a shattering experience. There has also been a backlash of sorts to The Irishman, to the effect that we shouldn’t take Frank Sheeran claims about his role in the disappearance of Teamsters’ boss Jimmy Hoffa at face value. I agree. We shouldn’t. But that doesn’t detract from the personal story that it has to tell, and the power and substance of this late-period, minor-key symphony of a movie, with its great alpha-performances from Joe Pesci and Al Pacino – though, again, I am a bit surprised to see nothing for De Niro himself as Sheeran. There are some notable acting nominations here: a double for Scarlett Johansson, who gets a thoroughly deserved best actress nomination for her appearance in Noah Baumbach’s utterly delectable divorce tragicomedy Marriage Story. But worryingly, she gets a best supporting actress nod for her middling performance in the awful second world war romp Jojo Rabbit – and again, I have to restate my refusenik status for this fatuous, misjudged, tone-deaf piece of work which is all the more baffling as its creator Taika Waititi has done such genuinely great stuff in the past. As with Joker, however, I have to say it is a lot more more intelligent than its Twitter fantrolls. I’m hoping that Gerwig’s rich, warm, generous Little Women will upset the apple-cart and win the best picture Oscar, but it’s a long shot. In the best actor list, perhaps Antonio Banderas will sneak through the middle and get it for his wonderfully witty and mature performance in Almodovar’s Pain and Glory. In the best supporting actor category, I think Joe Pesci will pinch it for his subtle portrayal of mob fixer Russell Bufalino — although fellow nominee Tom Hanks has a huge fanbase for his appearance in A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood. 
There are two sorts of movie stars, and the demands of the market are such that the first type must occasionally pretend to be the second type. The first type is the critical darling, accomplished thespians who command crowds of screaming admirers at Cannes even though they may not be household names. They appear in glowingly reviewed indies and attract the attention of international auteurs, regularly landing on year-end best-of lists and awards lineups. They inspire rapturous reviews filled with flowery prose about nuance and subtlety, the exquisite artistry of the acting craft, et cetera. The second type is the box-office champion, a known entity perhaps lacking in a certain prestige who nonetheless stands atop the world of pop culture. These are our Dwayne Johnsons and Kevin Harts, our Rebel Wilsons and, soon perhaps, our Emilia Clarkes. They lead tentpole releases, put cheeks in seats and keep the studio coffers full. And it is because the flow of that money has tributaries diverting into the talent’s bank account that the first type of movie star is often compelled to try their hand as the second type. There’s an envy that cuts both ways, whether one sort of star covets the other half’s esteem or pay rates, but the key difference is that a person wants respect and needs money. It’s a lot easier for an actor to afford participation in those low-budget passion projects when there’s a comforting lump sum in their savings, not to mention that those films are more likely to hook viewers if the star’s been in something recognizable of late. It is because there’s a considerable overlap between these two modes of fame that the expression “one for me, one for them” was coined to articulate how versatile stars navigate their creative whims with the imperatives of the biz. Enter Kristen Stewart, a star who’s spent more of the last decade on “for me” than “for them”. She arrived on the scene as a star in the box-office draw mold, making a name for herself as a lip-biting heartthrob in the Twilight franchise, and then went about proving just how much more she was capable of. She tackled literary adaptations like On the Road and worked with such renowned auteurs as Olivier Assayas, Kelly Reichardt and Woody Allen. (Though he’s really only renowned in some parts of the world these days, mostly France, where Stewart became the first American female actor to win a Cesar award, their equivalent of the Oscar.) She shrugged off most of the spotlight on her, bristling during the interviews in which she expressed a desire to do her work without attracting the glare of attention. But to get the more meaningful movies financed and in the black once they’re released, it helps to recharge one’s star-power batteries every now and then, and that much has presented a complicated obstacle to Stewart. The past few months have seen her attempting to shore up her presence on the A-list with a pair of big-budget studio jobs in the Elizabeth Banks-directed reboot of Charlie’s Angels, and this weekend’s sci-fi/horror spectacle Underwater. In them, she does things she doesn’t often do on screen: deliver snappy one-liners, dispatch men twice her size in hand-to-hand combat, strap into cybernetic scuba-armor, do battle with CGI monstrosities from the briny deep. She’s straying from the arthouse and re-entering neighborhood cineplexes, and as in the hostile depths of the Mariana Trench that set the scene for Underwater, the terrain hasn’t always been friendly. Charlie’s Angels drew dire notices and barely broke even, and although Underwater has inspired slightly more positive reviews, its quiet rollout from Fox and its early January premiere date foretell an underwhelming showing. In both instances, Stewart’s turning in strong work, as a winning smart aleck in the former and a steely action hero in the latter. But her presence doesn’t mesh with the whole of the project in either instance. In Charlie’s Angels, she’s acting smarter than the movie around her, and in Underwater, she’s exuding a quiet intensity at odds with the B-movie “Ridley Scott’s Alien, but beneath the waves” premise. She’s doing better work than the movie deserves, the same issue that led to hordes of chuckleheads exiting the Twilight years under the impression Stewart was an un-emotive rather than a subtle actor. (Curiously enough, her old co-star Robert Pattinson is going through a similar process now, pinning his hopes at re-establishing his selling power with middlebrow America on his upcoming gig as Batman.) It’s for this reason she stuck out like a talented sore thumb in 2012’s Snow White and the Huntsman, a film that made her out to be a more ordinary onscreen quantity than she allows herself to be. She’s never been able to plug herself into a proper blockbuster, but she hasn’t let that stop her from excelling. Stewart has been doing her duty and working the press circuit for these marquee titles, and yet she’s moving through it all like a visitor. Her true homeland is several steps away from the mainstream, where her reserved acting style of facial tics and expressive stillness can flourish. Sounds like that’s the direction in which she’s once again headed; her next role on the docket will be in Clea DuVall’s independent production Happiest Season, about a lesbian couple preparing to break the news of their love to one half’s conservative parents. Here’s hoping that with her tour of duty completed, the years to come will bring more roles suited to her particular set of skills. A star with not just the depth of a Kristen Stewart, but the inclination to exercise it in films that push her to consistently challenge herself, is a terrible thing to waste.
It’s been a string of banner years for documentaries, and 2020 seems poised to follow suit, with a number of films examining pop stardom, ambition and celebrity. Documentaries detailing (with cooperation) the lives of such figures as Taylor Swift, Billie Eilish, Rihanna, Greta Thunberg and Hillary Clinton are all set to premiere on global streaming services this year, as well as topical features on the Deepwater Horizon oil spill and gun safety activism after Parkland. Here are 10 of the most buzzworthy documentaries to catch in 2020: Rihanna No second name, subtitle or qualification necessary – the multi-hyphenate fashion mogul and singer will get her own film treatment in 2020 to stream on Amazon in a whopping $25m deal. Director Peter Berg, who also directed the Barbadian singer in Battleship, has reportedly worked on the project for years, amassing over 1,200 hours of footage. Rihanna takes an intimate, expansive look at the superstar’s development into one of the world’s biggest pop acts and pioneer of the Fenty beauty and fashion lines while providing a window into the star’s “personality, humor, philosophies on work, family and love”. Us Kids In the nearly two years since a shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school ended 17 lives, the survivors in Parkland, Florida, have been bravely, doggedly visible – through social media, the student-led March for Our Lives protests, and in documentaries such as Song of Parkland and the activism-focused After Parkland. This month, there’s Us Kids, premiering at Sundance. Directed by Kim A Snyder – who also spent years befriending the families and community members torn asunder by another horrid school shooting for her 2017 film Newtown – Us Kids will track the students of MSD high school as they became unexpected, and effective, youth leaders and activists. Taylor Swift: Miss Americana In another high-profile documentary on music stardom, Taylor Swift: Miss Americana will premiere at Sundance and on Netflix at a still unspecified date. The film will cover, according to director Lana Wilson, a “transformational period in [Swift’s] life as she learns to embrace her role not only as a songwriter and performer, but as a woman harnessing the full power of her voice”. In other words: probably the past three or so years in Swift’s career, a time in which the singer retreated from the spotlight following a very public feud with Kanye West and Kim Kardashian, embraced a more outsized political voice (especially on LGBTQ+ rights), released two albums and became a leading voice for artist compensation in the music industry. The Cost of Silence Also premiering at Sundance this month is a film on another still-unfolding tragedy: the BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill, which dumped an estimated 130m gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico on 20 April 2010. Film-maker Mark Manning, himself a former deep-sea oilfield diver, made The Cost of Silence after years of investigating the disaster from its outset, to the cleanup itself full of toxic chemicals, to what he has called an effort from petrochemical companies and the federal government to downplay its damaging effects on public health. Billie Eilish Rihanna isn’t the only music star with a massive documentary payday – just a week before news broke on Rihanna’s Amazon deal, teen phenom Billie Eilish reportedly signed her own $25m deal with Apple TV+ for a film on her stratospheric rise in 2019. Through access to friends and family and behind-the-scenes footage of her public appearances, the still-untitled film will follow the 18-year-old’s launch from cult fandom to superstardom with the release of her debut album When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go? in March. Lance Amid the slew of examine-the-life documentaries out this year, perhaps no subject has quite the ethical question mark as much as Lance Armstrong, the cyclist whose battle with cancer captured the public’s attention for years before the admission that he cheated with doping left his reputation in tatters. In Lance, director Marina Zenovich (Robin Williams: Come Inside My Mind) reportedly received unprecedented access to the fallen star, producing a film Sundance promises will be “a powerful study of that 21st-century phenomenon: the celebrity who falls spectacularly and publicly from grace”. McMillion$ Executive-produced by Mark Wahlberg, the HBO docuseries McMillions dives into the genuinely insane story of the McDonald’s Monopoly game fraud, a decades-long scheme which netted millions in illegitimate prize money until the FBI unraveled the racket in 2000. Premiering on 3 February, McMillions will explore the scam through archival footage and interviews with FBI agents, defrauded McDonald’s executives, lawyers and the prizewinners themselves. Hillary Also receiving the cooperative documentary treatment this year: Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, whose four-part series Hillary will premiere on Hulu on 6 March. Directed by Nanette Burstein, the project features interviews with Clinton, her husband Bill, and close friends and journalists interspersed with recollections from the former first lady’s journey from midwestern genius to a few electoral college votes shy of the White House. The Perfect Weapon With the 2020 election now less than a year away and its security from foreign interference a matter of impeachable interest, few documentaries seem more timely than HBO’s The Perfect Weapon, based on the book by the New York Times national security correspondent, David E Sanger. The film, directed by John Maggio, promises to take viewers on the frontlines of cyberwars through exclusive interviews with top military and intelligence officials coupled with on-the-ground reporting, revealing “the rise of cyber-conflict as the primary way nations now compete and sabotage each other”. Greta Director Nathan Grossman has followed 16-year-old Greta Thunberg from her 2018 school strike in Sweden to world parliaments and the United Nations. The film, working title Greta, offers a behind-the-scenes look at the commitment and visceral urgency that have brought Time magazine’s person of the year, and her mission of addressing and ending the climate crisis now, to the height of visibility. It will debut on Hulu sometime in 2020. Saudi Runaway In the vein of last year’s Midnight Traveler, a documentary filmed by an Afghan migrant family entirely on their cellphones, Saudi Runaway will follow Muna, a young Saudi Arabian woman, as she documents her impending arranged marriage and plans for escape on her phone. Compiled by the German film-maker Susanne Regina Meures, Muna’s secret iPhone footage reveals “an equal-parts vulnerable and riveting narrative that is wholly alive with fear and hope for a better life”. Unnamed film on sexual harassment in the music industry In December, it was revealed that Apple TV+ had acquired streaming rights to several Oprah Winfrey-produced projects, including a documentary which captured an as-yet-unrevealed source as she contemplated going public with her story of sexual assault by a prominent figure in the music industry. Days later, the Los Angeles Times reported the source as Drew Dixon, a former executive at Def Jam records, who accused mogul Russell Simmons of harassment and rape in 1995 in an article with the New York Times. The still-untitled doc is helmed by Kirby Dick and Amy Ziering, the duo behind the Oscar-nominated The Invisible War, on life after sexual assault, and The Hunting Ground, on sexual assault at college campuses.
1917 An epic of Lean-ian proportions is delivered in this spectacular from director and co-writer Sam Mendes, who has developed a real-life story of heroism involving his grandfather, the novelist Alfred Mendes, and his first world war experiences on the western front in 1917. 10 January (All details marked are UK release dates) Bombshell A key event in the ongoing #MeToo movement is the case of TV executive, Republican media consultant and serial abuser Roger Ailes. This movie tells the story of three women at Fox News, played by Margot Robbie, Charlize Theron and Nicole Kidman, who set out to expose him for sexual harassment. 17 January Waves A much acclaimed portrait of an African-American family in Florida trying to stay together. Kelvin Harrison Jr plays Tyler, a teenager struggling under the fierce expectations of his demanding father, played by Sterling K Brown, while pursuing a relationship with Emily, a girl in his class played by Alexa Demi. The ensemble playing has been praised, as has the bold non-linear storytelling style. 17 January The Personal History of David Copperfield Armando Iannucci brings his masterly satirical touch to this classic, working with co-writer Simon Blackwell and bringing in a diverse cast headed by Dev Patel to tap into Charles Dickens’ humanity, optimism and fun. 24 January A Beautiful Day in the Neighbourhood Tom Hanks stars in this heartwarmer about the children’s TV star Fred Rogers – a legend in the US, though little known in the UK – who presented an afternoon show called Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood and was America’s answer to John Noakes, John Craven and Tony Hart all rolled into one. 31 January The Lighthouse For the followup to his much-admired chiller The Witch, Robert Eggers delivers a brutal, gripping nightmare. Willem Dafoe and Robert Pattinson give sledgehammer performances as two lighthouse-keepers on a remote island going slowly and then quickly mad. 31 January Parasite South Korean film-maker Bong Joon-ho won the Cannes Palme d’Or for this satirical gem. It’s an invasion of the lifestyle snatchers about a wealthy family who hire live-in servants without realising that they are all one family, a cuckoo-in-the-nest gang of predators planning to take over. 7 February Portrait of a Lady on Fire A superbly elegant, enigmatic period drama from French film-maker Céline Sciamma. Adèle Haenel plays an 18th-century young noblewoman whose mother hires her a “companion”, Marianne (Noémie Merlant), without revealing that she is an artist who has been commissioned to paint a secret portrait of her young mistress. A tense relationship develops. 28 February Misbehaviour Gaby Chiappe and Rebecca Frayn are the screenwriters for this comedy about the 1970 Miss World competition in which Miss Grenada (Gugu Mbatha-Raw) won and, under controversial and chaotic circumstances, became the first black winner. Greg Kinnear plays the host, Bob Hope, horrified by a flour-throwing protest from feminist campaigners. 13 March The Perfect Candidate Saudi film-maker Haifaa al-Mansour comes from a country in which there are very few women working in cinema – or anywhere – so this is a personal project for her. It’s the story of a female doctor who causes a sensation by making a successful run for office in the local municipal elections. 13 March No Time to Die Daniel Craig hangs up his Beretta, his tux and sky-blue swimming briefs and bows out as Bond. Veteran 007 screenwriters Neal Purvis and Robert Wade have teamed up with Fleabag creator Phoebe Waller-Bridge for what is purportedly a funny, savvy last hurrah for Craig. 3 April Rocks Screenwriters Theresa Ikoko and Claire Wilson and director Sarah Gavron team up to create a joyful film: a social realist adventure about a bunch of Year 11 girls at an east London secondary school. Newcomer Bukky Bakray is a Nigerian-British girl who has to look after her kid brother when her mum goes awol. There’s a rush of energy and creativity in this film. 10 April Black Widow Cate Shortland, who made the great Australian film Somersault, takes the helm of this superhero movie, in which Black Widow from Avengers takes centre stage. Scarlett Johansson returns in the title role. 1 May Deerskin Possibly the strangest film of the year, from French film-maker, musician and DJ Quentin Dupieux, AKA Mr Oizo. Jean Dujardin stars as a serial killer who is obsessed with his vintage 60s deerskin jacket. 8 May Wonder Woman 1984 This is another superheroine instalment in the DC Extended Universe, and features Gal Gadot as Wonder Woman in the 1980s who comes up against a new foe: Cheetah, an evil British archaeologist played by Kristen Wiig. 5 June Ghostbusters: Afterlife Whoever it is you were gonna call, you’d better call ’em again. This new Ghostbusters returns to the classic all-male template, in effect a sequel to Ghostbusters 2, with such veterans as Bill Murray and Sigourney Weaver reprising their roles and Jason (son of Ivan) Reitman directing. 10 July Top Gun: Maverick Still speedy, still needy, still eerily boyish, Captain Pete “Maverick” Mitchell returns – the US Navy pilot played by Tom Cruise who could be piloting a desk by now but is still a badass warrior of the skies. Jennifer Connelly is now Tom’s love interest, a mere nine years his junior. 17 July Last Night in Soho One of Britain’s brightest movie talents, Edgar Wright, returns with a psychological London horror avowedly in the classic style of Nicolas Roeg, set in the glamorous and seedy world of swinging 60s London and co-written with Krysty Wilson-Cairns (who also co-scripted 1917). 18 September The Trial of the Chicago 7 Renowned screenwriter and director Aaron Sorkin has created a comic crime thriller based around the story of the Chicago Seven — the counterculture protesters charged with conspiracy to riot. Sorkin is famed for his machine-gun dialogue, so a fast-talking defence of the seven could be on offer. 25 September The Many Saints of Newark David Chase has co-written a movie follow-up to his iconic HBO series The Sopranos, featuring Michael Gandolfini as the young Tony Soprano – Michael being the son of the late James Gandolfini who played the New Jersey crime boss on the small screen. But who will play the ruthless matriarch Livia? 25 September The Eternals Chloé Zhao is the film-maker lauded for her tough docu-realist picture The Rider. This couldn’t be more different. It’s a Marvel superhero film about a mighty race of aliens, featuring Angelina Jolie, Richard Madden and Gemma Chan. 6 November Dune Another adaptation of the classic sci-fi novel by Frank Herbert. It takes some chutzpah to take on a story last adapted by David Lynch, but this is what Denis Villeneuve has done – having already shown he has the sci-fi chops with his films Arrival and Blade Runner 2049. Oscar Isaac, Timothée Chalamet and Rebecca Ferguson star. 20 November West Side Story Steven Spielberg takes on the classic with its immortal Leonard Bernstein score … but will it follow the Broadway revival in dropping the song I Feel Pretty? Ansel Elgort and Rachel Zegler are the star-crossed lovers Tony and Maria. 18 December News of the World Paul Greengrass’s latest film is based on the western novel by Paulette Jiles about a young girl returning to her family in 1860s Texas after being kidnapped by the Kiowa tribe. Helena Zengel plays the girl, Johanna, and Tom Hanks plays the man who must look after her: Captain Kidd, an army veteran who makes a living reading newspapers to illiterate townsfolk and who is now in the middle of a very big news story. 25 December Antebellum Gerard Bush and Christopher Renz make their feature debut with this much-hyped new supernatural horror starring Janelle Monáe, with a story set both in a slave plantation and also in the present day. It’s a satirical chiller which could be in the same vein as Get Out. Spring Ammonite An intriguingly Fowlesian story is on offer from writer-director Francis Lee (the author of God’s Own Country): in Victorian Britain, Mary Anning (Kate Winslet) is a geologist and fossil hunter who has fallen on hard times, and when a rich tourist asks her to look after his wife (Saoirse Ronan), a complex relationship ensues. To be confirmed The Souvenir Part 2 It has to be one of the film world’s most unusual sequels, as well as one of the quickest to follow its original. Joanna Hogg has delivered a followup to her hugely admired autobiographical film about a young woman who wants to be a film-maker and falls into a destructive relationship. Honor Swinton Byrne and Tilda Swinton reprise their original roles. To be confirmed The Man Who Killed Don Quixote For three decades, Terry Gilliam’s epically delayed attempt to make a film version of Don Quixote has been one of the great what-ifs and whens of film history, an ordeal of bad luck, wrecked sets and lost funding that has outlived two of the actors cast: John Hurt and Jean Rochefort. Now it is finally made, with Jonathan Pryce in the lead. To be confirmed Annette The wild man of French cinema is back. Leos Carax (who made the freaky Holy Motors, with Denis Lavant and Kylie Minogue) has now attempted a musical, starring Adam Driver and Marion Cotillard as a comedian and singer whose daughter has a special gift. Tunes come from the 70s band Sparks. To be confirmed Let Them All Talk Meryl Streep stars as a celebrated author in this film from Steven Soderbergh who takes a journey down memory lane with some old friends; Lucas Hedges is the nephew who gets involved with a literary agent played by Gemma Chan. To be confirmed The Painted Bird Festival audiences have been traumatised by this harrowing, three-hour black-and-white movie from Czech director Václav Marhoul, based on the 1965 Jerzy Kosiński novel about the horrors of war-torn eastern Europe. Not for the faint-hearted. To be confirmed Supernova Stanley Tucci and Colin Firth star as Tusker and Sam, life partners travelling across Britain in a camper van to see old friends and family members, their quest made bittersweet by the fact that one has early onset dementia. To be confirmed
Much of the debate concerning Noah Baumbach’s latest film has not concerned how good it is: this divorce drama has unified critics and audiences like few others this season. Its debut on the small screen has not come with the disappointment, even anger, that accompanied the Netflix drop of Martin Scorsese’s The Irishman – though that was a film whose length and visuals make it much less suited to the telly. Rather, the debate has largely been tribal: do you side with Nicole or with Charlie? Or do you take a higher moral ground and contend that such reductiveness is antithetical to the spirit of art and demeans all those who indulge in it? Here, we have our wedding cake and eat it. Why it’s Nicole’s fault She’s the one who moves to Los Angeles. She doesn’t have to – they are a New York family, despite her having been raised on the west coast. The pilot looks ropey, and surely there are other work opportunities she could have enjoyed in New York, had she a little more vision (and confidence). Secondly: she hires Nora, and believes she’ll play fair. That’s a major error of judgment. Plus, whether by design or accident, she blocks Charlie using most other affordable lawyers by consulting them first. Apparently, her sister set up the meetings, but, given the number of them, it’s hard to believe that she saw them all accidentally. The incidentals seem mean, too: not offering Charlie a bed for the night on the day he’s served with divorce papers. The last-minute volte face about Halloween. Right from that initial mediator meeting, Nicole is by far the more spiky and volatile – the person who makes things difficult. Why it’s Charlie’s fault He cheated. He was wrapped up in his work to the detriment of both Nicole’s career and her sense of self. He didn’t temporarily move to LA when they were married – though did agree to a hiatus in Europe. Nicole’s redeeming features She’s honest, while Charlie does fib a little. She does more of the childcare. She has to contend with her own family, as well as her ex – though this is also a luxury that Charlie (who’s estranged from his own parents) can’t enjoy. She’s essentially kind and loving; suckered by Nora when she’s at her most vulnerable and the lawyer is at her most rapacious. Late on, she concedes she did the wrong thing in proceeding with lawyers, though the way that confrontation plays out goes some way to vindicating her decision. Plus, she’s the victim of something bigger than just this story. The first scene earning rounds of applause in the cinema is Nicole’s blindside against the injustice of the pressures put on mothers but not on fathers. It’s calculated, articulate, cathartic – and valid. Charlie’s redeeming features How long have you got? He’s a self-made genius. A wonderful boss; if anything too diligent and kind. A fantastic father: creative, loving, devoted. He moves 3,000 miles, away from everything else he loves, to be with his son. He’s an adorable son- and brother-in-law. All his flaws are forgivable and his errors of judgment relatable – who hasn’t struggled with a rental-car child seat? Sometimes they’re even aspirational: sure, he cheated, but only once. And, as he says, he stayed faithful in his 20s, when he had ample opportunity and appetite to stray. One of the funniest scenes in the film comes when Charlie and Henry spend the evening under the mirthless gaze of Martha Kelly’s mediator – and he accidentally slices his arm open. Charlie protests its painlessness through the agony to brilliant comic effect. But have no doubt: this man bleeds. Charlie is the one who says that he hopes every day that his ex is dead, that she gets ill and then hit by a car and then dies. He’s also the one who is embraced and comforted the very next second. Because, even if he does mean it, he’s been hurt. Why it’s your fault for caring Few break-ups are without blame on both sides, and no films are interesting that exist in such polarities. The trend for gunning for one of the couple is a nasty, social-media-fuelled impulse that lowers the audience and insults the art. Plus, the split is a red herring – right? Baumbach himself has protested that it’s not really about divorce at all. But does that ring false? Could it be a way of deflecting attention from the immensely personal private inspiration for the film? The lawyers Two major career renaissances (for Alan Alda and Ray Liotta) have been de facto launched by Marriage Story, while Laura Dern’s bubbling comeback has gone red hot. Dern has won widespread praise and a small coterie of detractors for her rapacious turn as Nora, the cutthroat broker hired by Nicole. It’s a performance of rare charisma and lethal efficiency – which makes especially compelling contrast with Dern’s role as Marmie in Little Women, directed by Baumbach’s other half, Greta Gerwig. Did her showstopping turn detract from the human drama for you? How about Alda and Liotta: was the first too cuddly and the latter too bombastic? Or were these turns that reminded you just what gems these actors were to start with? Did the film demonise divorce lawyers? Or are they just doing their – grisly, necessary – job? The Sondheim It’s easy to forget there are two full performances of numbers from Company in the film. Nicole belts out a larky You Could Drive a Person Crazy with her mother and sister at a family do, while Driver’s internet-breaking version of Being Alive is easily the musical moment of the cinematic year so far. (We’ve yet to experience Cats.) Did his performance floor you? Or did you find it too protracted and self-advertising? First-world problems The stakes in the film are, in their specificity, extremely high, and taken in relief to most lives, quite low. The main issue is whether Charlie will need to move to Los Angeles to keep up regular contact with his son. When he does so, it’s pretty seamless – albeit a bit lonely – and he finds fulfilling work relatively fast. It’s never an option that the pair will reconcile – Baumbach sets the action almost entirely post-split, and the sadness of the divorce process comes not primarily from the love affair ending but the attendant stresses and strains and the ways in which the process encourages nastiness. Their son seems relatively well adjusted; we know he will be fine. Money isn’t really an issue. Should we still care? And if we do, why?
Eight years after The Dark Knight Rises, the Oscar-winner’s mooted return to comic book movies in Thor: Love and Thunder could offer him the chance to play a truly bombastic baddie Christian Bale remains by far the most celebrated Batman. Christian Bale remains by far the most celebrated Batman. Photograph: Ron Phillips It is something of an irony that the role of Batman, while being perhaps the most sought after in comic book movies, requires its vessel to downplay any showy tendencies to capture the enigmatic spirit of DC’s caped crusader. Michael Keaton, not previously known for soft-pedalled subtlety on screen, knew that Jack Nicholson’s Joker would get all the great lines in 1989’s Batman, and Heath Ledger stole the show so completely as the clown prince of Gotham in 2008’s The Dark Knight that some of us wondered privately if Christopher Nolan ought to have renamed the movie. It is to Christian Bale’s credit that he remains by far the most celebrated Batman despite employing an eloquently taciturn approach to the role: always at the centre of the action, yet never crowding the mise-en-scène. Throughout Nolan’s trilogy of films, Bale seems to slip in and out of the shadows at the optimum moment – always there to drive the narrative but never overpowering the storyline. In many ways, it is a self-sacrificing turn worthy of Batman himself: he is the eternal straight man to a cavalcade of sneering, leering villains who gleefully mop up all available attention. How then, to react to the news that the the Welsh-born actor is finally set to return to comic book movies, eight years (though it somehow feels like more) since casting off the cape and cowl for the final time following the climactic events of 2012’s The Dark Knight Rises? Bale is being touted for a high-profile role in Thor: Love and Thunder, the much-anticipated latest instalment in Marvel’s revamped saga of the Norse god. This may not be the Sean Connery-style latter day return to playing Batman that fans of Nolan’s triptych would love to see – Robert Pattinson looks a shoo-in to retain the role for at least the next few movies after signing on for Matt Reeves’ The Batman. But it’s undoubtedly a fabulous time for Bale to be joining the Marvel series. Taika Waititi’s Thor: Ragnarok reinvigorated Chris Hemsworth’s son of Odin, playing brilliantly on the Australian actor’s newfound comedy chops and establishing him as the kind of freewheeling cosmic adventurer that the Guardians of the Galaxy might easily find themselves bumping into (they duly did in Avengers: Infinity War and Endgame). Thor himself handed the mantle of king of Asgard to Tessa Thompson’s Valkyrie at the end of the latter movie, which means the known cosmos is suddenly his infinite oyster. Marvel is also borrowing tantalisingly from the daring 2014 comic book storyline Original Sin, in which Thor’s human, cancer-suffering sometime-partner Jane Foster takes up the hammer Mjölnir and becomes the new Thor. How that affect’s Hemsworth’s role – in the comics he is reduced to the role of “Odinson” – remains to be seen. Natalie Portman, so under-used as Foster in previous instalments, will return to the role in the new episode. Bale is being mooted to play Thor’s uncle Cul, otherwise known as the god of fear, as Marvel continues to expand the boundaries of the Norse deity’s extended family following the debut of Cate Blanchett as his nefarious sister Hela in Thor: Ragnarok. In the comics, Cul joins Thor’s angry father Odin in his battle to retrieve Mjölnir from Foster – in the movie it is likely to be Cul alone who vies to retrieve the sacred weapon, given that Anthony Hopkins’ Odin died in Ragnarok. Blanchett had all kinds of fun playing the goddess of death as a slinky, gothic, all-powerful queen of the underworld, which perhaps explains why Bale is keen on joining Marvel’s pantheon of crazy. Not since American Psycho has the Oscar-winner had the chance to play a truly operatic, bombastic baddie, a role of scenery-chewing fury – the anti-Batman. Perhaps he will now get his opportunity.
This year’s nominations have shown love for Joker and 1917 but a host of awards-primed films have been left out in the cold Clockwise from top left, Cats, The Aeronauts, Just Mercy and Dark Waters. Clockwise from top left: Cats, The Aeronauts, Just Mercy and Dark Waters. Composite: Working Title Films/Amazon/Warner Bros/Focus Features Motherless Brooklyn Given a splashy premiere at the Telluride film festival, one of the most discerning of all the fall festivals, early word suggested that Motherless Brooklyn could return Edward Norton to the Academy’s good graces. But the three-time nominee’s long-gestating passion project (a starry adaptation of Jonathan Lethem’s award-winning noir) was ultimately more of a vanity project, complete with a mannered, almost parodic Norton central performance. It wasn’t a complete disaster but it felt like the kind of competent Miramax prestige pic that would have been pushed in 2003 and forgotten about by 2004. Richard Jewell Clint Eastwood has developed an impressive habit of sneaking into the awards race at the last minute, dropping films late in the day, often speedily made yet always finely crafted. It’s a strategy that’s paid off on a number of occasions – Million Dollar Baby, American Sniper – but last year, the sterling credentials of awards-friendly fact-based drama Richard Jewell weren’t enough to make a mark. The film, which tells the story of the security guard falsely accused of planting a bomb at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, received solid reviews but also faced controversy over its inaccurate portrayal of a female journalist, alleging she swapped sex for tips. Audiences responded with apathy and the film gave Eastwood one of his worst-ever openings. As Jewell’s mother, Bates scored a supporting actress nomination at the Golden Globes and the Oscars but it’s a poor showing for a film that was aiming for so much more. Just Mercy When the fact-based legal drama Just Mercy premiered at last year’s Toronto film festival, complaints about its by-the-numbers storytelling were outweighed by both the film’s undeniable emotive power and praise for Jamie Foxx’s turn as a man wrongly accused of murder. He was seen as an instant lock for best supporting actor but as we edged closer to awards season, the film, and Foxx, started to lose steam. He picked up a Screen Actors Guild nomination but was shut out elsewhere and the film’s late release strategy meant that for many, it was unfairly buried underneath contenders with a more distinctive edge. Cats Rushed by the director Tom Hooper in order to meet an Oscar-friendly release date, Cats was unleashed in such a shoddy state that a tweaked cut was shipped to cinemas just days after it went wide. Quite why Universal thought a plotless musical populated by nonsensically named CG monstrosities would appeal to voters is a mystery but the reception for the film was so bad that the studio removed it from its “for your consideration” roster soon after it tanked. Even Taylor Swift’s original, but forgettable, song couldn’t claw its way into this week’s list of nominees. The lessons should hopefully be clear: not every well-known IP should be resurrected, Tom Hooper can’t be trusted and, most importantly, don’t fuck with Cats. Dark Waters Like Just Mercy, Dark Waters took an aggravating real-life legal case and turned it into an involving, sturdy film – and like Just Mercy, it also failed to make a convincing enough argument for inclusion to Academy voters. A muted thriller about a staggering case of corporate negligence, it acted as more of a call to action than a fully formed movie, with the director Todd Haynes and stars Mark Ruffalo and Anne Hathaway mostly coasting. It’s the kind of story that viewers have become more accustomed to finding on Netflix and its underwhelming box office suggests that the small screen might be where similarly plotted stories belong in the future. The Aeronauts Reuniting the stars of The Theory of Everything, Oscar-winning Eddie Redmayne and Oscar-nominated Felicity Jones, the ambitious period adventure The Aeronauts was sold on the strange assertion that audiences would care about seeing the pair together again. But while the Stephen Hawking biopic made an impact upon release, it’s not a film that’s stuck in the years since and Amazon’s ballooning semi-biopic was deflating for a number of reasons. A restrained release – the film was originally set to be on Imax yet ultimately in most territories reserved to streaming only – and polite, if unenthused, reviews meant that it couldn’t work as either a mass market effects extravaganza or an awards-friendly critical darling. The Goldfinch On paper, so much suggested that a prestigious adaptation of The Goldfinch would be a natural fit for the Oscars, from the award-winning cast (Nicole Kidman, Jeffrey Wright, Sarah Paulson) to the Pulitzer prize-winning source material from Donna Tartt to a director whose last film, Brooklyn, was feted by the Academy. But when it came to the film itself, based on what’s been called unfilmable source material, Warner Bros granted it a token Toronto film festival premiere just days before it crash-landed into cinemas with one of the year’s worst openings and some of the season’s most hateful reviews. Dolemite Is My Name One of the many surprise snubs from this week’s Oscar nominations was the exclusion of the blaxploitation biopic Dolemite Is My Name. At this stage of the season, most hadn’t predicted it to figure in the best picture race but Eddie Murphy, who had been figuring heavily in the circuit, was seen as a strong contender for best actor. It’s a disappointment with a number of possible explanations: an unusually stacked category, some ill will toward Murphy for prior behaviour and also a refusal from some Academy members to take comedians seriously (Adam Sandler’s career-best turn in Uncut Gems was also left out in the cold).
Netflix is this year facing its sternest challenge since it embarked on the path to global streaming dominance, with a prediction it could lose 16 million subscribers to cash-rich rivals led by Disney. This year marks the start of a worldwide streaming battle, with the biggest threat to Netflix posed by Disney, which backed the US launch of its Disney + service in November last year with the debut of the $100m Star Wars spin-off TV series, The Mandalorian, seen as the biggest threat to the dominance of Netflix. Disney+, which has received a wave of free global publicity Thanks to the Mandalorian’s Baby Yoda sensation, amassed 10 million subscriptions on its first day. Analysts say Disney +, which launches in the UK and Europe on 31 March, is set to put the global brakes on the relentless growth of Netflix. Netflix’s chief content officer, Ted Sarandos, denied the company was worried. Speaking at the Bafta Tea Party event in Los Angeles on Saturday, he said: “We’re totally focused on making about 160 million people around the world happy every night, and that’s all we think about.” Sarandos was speaking as Netflix grabbed the top nominations for both TV and film at the Golden Globes. The California-based company’s TV series including The Crown and Unbelievable are likely to fare well during Sunday’s ceremony, while films including The Irishman and Marriage Story are favourites at both the Globes and next month’s Oscars. The two movies are among the frontrunners for the best picture Academy Award, which would be Netflix’s first. Sarandos said: “You’ve seen us build up our original film initiative both in terms of the volume of the films but more importantly the quality of the films that are coming out, so: more to come – a lot more to come.” Nevertheless, many see this year as a high watermark for the firm. “The streaming wars will result in clear winners and losers this year with Disney the juggernaut that will help disrupt 10%-plus of Netflix’s subscriber base,” said Daniel Ives, managing director of equity research at California-based investment firm Wedbush. “We believe 10% of Netflix’s 160 million global subscribers are at risk of potentially churning due to the Disney streaming service and rising competition in 2020.” Wedbush points to Disney’s potent combination of crown-jewel content – from the Marvel superhero universe of films and TV spin-offs to Pixar films such as Toy Story 4, family fare such as Frozen 2 and TV series including Scandal and Grey’s Anatomy – and very competitive price. In the US, Disney+ is almost half the cost of Netflix’s most popular tier, $6.99-a-month compared to $12.99, and in the UK it is likely to be several pounds cheaper, at about £5.99, compared with Netflix’s most-popular standard package at £8.99. The increasingly crowded global streaming market also includes includes Apple TV+, which launched in 100 countries in November at a cut-price £4.99, and in April Sky’s owner Comcast will unveil the Peacock streaming service, which will take back another big Netflix hit, the US version of The Office. It also owns the Universal film studio behind the Jurassic Park and Fast and the Furious franchises. On New Year’s Day, Netflix’s 60 million subscribers in the US, its biggest market, woke up to find Friends, among the streaming giant’s most watched TV shows globally, had disappeared from the service. The show has been clawed back by WarnerMedia, the owner of the film studio behind Lord of the Rings and Harry Potter, the DC Comics universe including Batman and Superman, and HBO shows from Game of Thrones to Big Little Lies, as it prepares to launch its Netflix rival HBO Max in May “Originally, 200 million Netflix subscribers by end of 2020 looked hittable, but now the aggressive pricing of Disney and Apple coupled with massive customer sign-ups [since launching] makes this a very tough road,” said Ives. “We believe [the target] will be pushed out to 2021 with Disney and Apple, as well as Peacock and HBO Max launching in the spring.” Disney+ is expected to hit 50 million subscriptions by the end of this year, a mixture of paying user and millions who enjoy the service free for a year through a deal with telecoms operator Verizon. The company is forecast to smash its own internal, pre-launch projection of hitting 60 million to 90 million global subscribers by 2024 by as much as two years. Netflix is set to significantly increase its $15bn annual content budget to face the threat and has been preparing for battle for years by investing increasingly heavily in its own films and TV shows to offset the effect of rivals such as Disney pulling content for their new services. “Netflix has by far the strongest catalogue, in the US it has 10 times the number of titles of Disney, and there are only so many Mandalorians Disney has at its disposal,” said Richard Broughton, an analyst at Ampere. “As more high-profile licensed content comes off Netflix, it will be a real test to see if its originals are strong enough to keep big subscriber numbers rolling in globally. I think there is room for a third player like Disney to join Netflix and Amazon at the top of global streaming, but I’m not sure if there is enough room for anyone else.”
In Monegeetta, Victoria, a town east of Mount Macedon and about an hour’s drive from the Melbourne CBD, a small group of people – including myself – are standing on muddy ground in the cold, outside Mintaro, a brick Italianate mansion built in 1881. Its spectacular features include a three-storey tower and Doric columns positioned at its imposing entrance. It is beautiful – and very creepy. Our eyes are glued to two television monitors. They are displaying feeds from cameras positioned inside, where the Mintaro’s decadent vibe is countered by a Dogs in Space kind of scuzziness – its grime-splotched walls and faded wallpaper suggesting the place has seen better days. This is the set of Justin Kurzel’s new film, True History of the Kelly Gang, the director’s scorching take on the legendary outlaw that brings a visceral, punkish energy to its source material, Peter Carey’s acclaimed novel of the same name. The scene being filmed is a relatively quiet moment for such an in-your-face production, depicting Ned (up-and-comer George MacKay) meeting his adversary, Constable Fitzpatrick (Nicholas Hoult), for the first time. Usually film set visits sound much more interesting than they are. A few years ago, for example, I spent eight long hours on the set of Thor: Ragnarok, observing many people fussily prepare shots that each lasted for about four seconds, capturing cast members who seemed to be posing rather than acting. Kurzel’s set in Monegeetta couldn’t be more different. The takes are long and differ every time, giving the actors space to develop their performances and the camera operators opportunity to experiment. Watching it feels a lot like live theatre. Speaking over a cup of tea during a break in filming, the South Australia-born auteur tells me that rather than being deterred by the numerous Ned Kelly movies that already exist, he felt they forced him to “think of things in different ways – to really aggressively try to find a new voice. That’s been a very deliberate thing throughout the process: to keep it feeling alive and fresh; to keep it feeling like it is walking along a tightrope.” Some of the film’s most striking scenes involve Ned and his gang wearing dresses, which was an element in Carey’s book. It is not without some historical basis: Kelly gang member Steve Hart, for instance, is known to have worn dresses in order to ride horses undetected. “There was something about those dresses – the idea of men wearing dresses in the Australian bush – that I found so evocative,” says Kurzel. “It was really interesting, looking at [Sidney] Nolan’s paintings again of Kelly, seeing Steve Hart in the background wearing a dress, the armour painted in different colours. I was like, what the fuck is that? It suddenly opened up a whole new way of looking at that period.” One of the people standing with me outside the Mintaro during filming is the film’s writer, Shaun Grant. He has worked with Kurzel before – penning their acclaimed 2011 debut Snowtown – and reiterates that push for originality, or even extremity: “Peter [Carey] took it so far,” he says, “and Justin and I decided to take it a step further.” Grant continues: “You know that history aficionados will say ‘that didn’t happen!’ But you can’t please everyone. And who really knows what happened back then? I’m all for messing with it and playing with it. There is always room for new stories about familiar legends. You just need to find a clear point of view.” That point of view involves a move away from realism into a meta space. References to legend, myth-making and the idea of fulfilling or escaping destiny are strewn throughout True History of the Kelly Gang (a title which, as is the case with Carey’s book, is ironic). Ned’s mother Ellen (Essie Davis), for instance, compels her son with lines such as “be who you are meant to be!”. There are occasions when Ned feels incentivised to take control of his personal narrative: “Every man should be an author of his own history,” he decrees. But there are also times when he seems resigned to the idea of never controlling how he will be remembered, on one occasion glumly noting that “a myth is more profitable than a man”. Cast members articulate the film’s approach to these self-conscious elements in different ways. Davis, for instance, tells me the story is “all about curses” and “trying not to become what you are cornered into becoming”. “There is of course a difference between the life of Ned Kelly and the legend, the story everybody wants,” Kurzel says. “He became bigger than what he was. We somehow found a way to use him to create an identity for what we are, and what we are not.” For MacKay, who plays old buckethead himself – without (gasp!) a beard – embracing the legend involved forgetting about Ned Kelly’s status as one of Australia’s most iconic, larger-than-life historical figures. “A legend is what other people made of him,” says MacKay. “He probably wasn’t a legend in his own time, so I play him as a guy who just happens to be called Ned Kelly. A bloke whose actions became – and stood for – something else. A man who became, in the end, a fridge magnet.” • True History of the Kelly Gang is in Australian cinemas now and will be available to stream on Stan on 26 January. It is released in UK cinemas on 28 February
The 18-year-old star becomes the youngest musician ever to write and sing the soundtrack to a Bond film Billie Eilish attends the Billboard Women in Music awards, 12 December 2019. Billie Eilish attends the Billboard Women in Music awards on 12 December 2019. Photograph: Emma McIntyre/Getty Images for Billboard Billie Eilish will write and sing the theme song to No Time to Die, the 25th film in the James Bond franchise. At 18 years old, she is the youngest musician ever to provide the soundtrack to a Bond film. Eilish said in a statement: “It feels crazy to be a part of this in every way. To be able to score the theme song to a film that is part of such a legendary series is a huge honour. James Bond is the coolest film franchise ever to exist. I’m still in shock.” As with her debut album, 2019’s When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go?, Eilish wrote the titular song alongside her older brother and co-producer Finneas. He said that the siblings had always dreamed of writing the theme to a Bond film. “There is no more iconic pairing of music and cinema than the likes of Goldfinger and Live and Let Die. We feel so so lucky to play a small role in such a legendary franchise, long live 007.” Film producers Michael G Wilson and Barbara Broccoli said that Eilish’s song had been “impeccably crafted to work within the emotional story of the film”. Director Cary Joji Fukunaga described himself as a huge fan of Eilish and her brother: “Their creative integrity and talent are second to none and I cannot wait for audiences to hear what they’ve brought – a fresh new perspective whose vocals will echo for generations to come.” Eilish is the latest sign of the Bond franchise’s modernisation. Phoebe Waller-Bridge was hired to liven up the script at the request of star Daniel Craig. Industry publication Variety described the hiring of Fukunaga, known for directing the films Sin Nombre and Beasts of No Nation, and TV’s True Detective, as a “stunning and risky move”. Hans Zimmer was recently drafted in as a last-minute replacement to score No Time to Die. He replaced Dan Romer, who departed due to creative differences with the film’s production company Eon Productions. No Time to Die is released in the UK on 2 April.
When the Baftas got it cripplingly, humiliatingly wrong last week, it wasn’t entirely surprising. The Baftas have always existed as the stuffier cousin to the Academy Awards, with a plummy, middle-of-the-road lethargy that quite naturally resulted in huge oversights. But the Oscars were meant to be better. After being on the receiving end of a number of backlashes, they had recognised their failings, changed up their membership and diversified. Yet somehow, they’ve still come up with a list awash in whiteness, loudness and angry men. Next to the Oscars, even this month’s Golden Globes seem comparatively woke. As has become tradition, the Academy was distracted by big-budget technical prowess, self-consciously transformative performances and famous faces playing real-life figures. While there were pleasant surprises here and there (notably Little Women’s Florence Pugh for Best Supporting Actress, Knives Out for Best Original Screenplay, Ad Astra for Best Sound Mixing and Pain and Glory’s Antonio Banderas for Best Actor), there was a feeling of safety from top to bottom: perennial Oscar favourite Sam Mendes with 1917; the rote masculinity of Ford v Ferrari; the twee, centrist nothingness of Jojo Rabbit. The sole nominee of colour in the acting categories, Harriet’s Cynthia Erivo, was still the star of a stately, overcooked biopic that earned few critical raves. Download the new Independent Premium app Sharing the full story, not just the headlines The more daring visions from last year were absent altogether – particularly the frantic exhilaration of Uncut Gems, which so should have earned Adam Sandler his first Oscar nod, and the neon-soaked defiance of Hustlers. If Willem Dafoe could earn a Best Actor nomination last year for At Eternity’s Gate, a film that absolutely no one saw and could potentially not actually exist, it is staggering that he and Robert Eggers’ nightmarish The Lighthouse were (aside from a well-deserved Best Cinematography nod) overlooked. Even Parasite, while awarded with six nominations, felt underappreciated considering how it has galvanised US audiences since its release. Frustratingly, Brits must wait another month to see it for themselves. Of the actors that didn’t make an appearance, spare a thought for Jennifer Lopez – that perpetual critical underdog, whose 25-year career in movies has been so often undermined, mocked and jeered at, despite the barriers she has constantly overcome along the way. Her dazzling performance in Hustlers was a ripped and spreadeagled tribute to her importance as a Hollywood figure and the skill that has kept her where she is. Her absence here would be enraging if it weren’t so boringly predictable. 20. Minding the Gap 19. The Farewell 18. Us 17. Pain & Glory Other notables refused a seat at the table were The Farewell’s Awkwafina and Zhao Shuzhen, Clemency’s Alfre Woodard and Dolemite Is My Name’s Eddie Murphy. The absence of Lupita Nyong’o, so mesmerising as two vastly different beings in Us, embodied once again the Academy’s odd reluctance to embrace horror. Then there were the filmmakers. The snubbed were mostly women on their second or third films, handed far smaller budgets than the men behind the 1917s and Jokers of the world, yet who produced sensitive, radical and alert pleasures – Hustlers’ Lorene Scafaria, Atlantics’ Mati Diop, The Farewell’s Lulu Wang. Marielle Heller’s Can You Ever Forgive Me? earned three Oscar nods just last year, yet she herself stayed off the Academy’s radar – as she has again for her work on A Beautiful Day in the Neighbourhood. Greta Gerwig’s lack of a Best Director nod, particularly in contrast to Todd Phillips’ photocopied Scorsese pastiche Joker, was such an emotional thud that nominations presenter Issa Rae couldn’t help but make a snarky joke about it: “Congratulations to those men.” In one sense, this was all inevitable. The Academy has never been cutting edge, more often than not gravitating towards the safe, the white and the narratively unambitious. But it’s also refused to admit such a thing. When Emma Baehr, director of awards at Bafta, blamed the industry as a whole for the lack of people of colour during this year’s nominations, it exposed a baffling ignorance of what is happening on the frontlines of filmmaking, and whose voices are breaking through. But the Academy’s members know the boom in female filmmakers, they know what films have been critically embraced, and they know that there are too many stunning performances from actors of colour being ignored. Membership has increased – it’s become younger, less white and less straight… yet here we are. While the industry is shifting, the Oscars remain the same. With TV ratings declining, and more and more filmmakers recognising what is typically being snubbed in favour of the loud and the expensive, it’s worth asking what the Oscars are even for anymore.
The week before the Oscar nominations on Monday (13 January) was meant to be the most exciting phase of awards season yet: after a glittery Golden Globes ceremony on Sunday, many of the most important industry guilds and groups weighed in with their own nominations during the following two days, helping to clarify the Oscar race and winnow down the ultimate list of contenders. So why are we in no mood to celebrate? Because that narrowing list has begun to exclude not just some of the most exciting performances and films of the season, but also many of the movies directed by women or featuring people of colour. And though the academy, which is due to release its nominations next week, has taken great pains to diversify itself since the years of #OscarsSoWhite, this past week suggests that other awards bodies still have a lot of soul-searching to do, and that this issue may require a total shift in what’s considered weighty and worthy. Download the new Independent Premium app Sharing the full story, not just the headlines Just look at Bafta, the British awards group that issued a list of nominations on Tuesday that failed to include even a single actor of colour. British-Nigerian actress Cynthia Erivo picked up a Screen Actors Guild nomination for Harriet, but Bafta snubbed her; ditto Lupita Nyong’o, so tremendous in Us, as well as Awkwafina, who has just won a Golden Globe for her performance in The Farewell. That movie’s scene-stealing grandma, Zhao Shuzhen, was similarly left out of Bafta’s Supporting Actress race, as was Hustlers star Jennifer Lopez, though Bafta still found room in that category to nominate Margot Robbie for playing two different blondes. Other actors of colour who turned in some of the most critically acclaimed work of the year, including Song Kang-ho and Cho Yeo Jeong from Parasite and Eddie Murphy from Dolemite Is My Name, were also excluded. Does Bafta have a blind spot when it comes to race? I’ll just note that this group has failed to ever nominate Denzel Washington or Morgan Freeman, even though the two men have 13 Oscar nominations for acting and three Academy Award statuettes between them. That’s one awfully concerted cold shoulder. But the problem extends far past Bafta: over the past decade, all but one of the Oscar wins for actors of colour have come in the supporting categories. Year after year, actors like Mahershala Ali, Viola Davis, Octavia Spencer, Mo’Nique, and Nyong’o have been asked to pose with their Oscars alongside the invariably white lead-acting winners, illustrating the notion that even when these talented performers triumph, they’re still seen as less than central. After all, it wasn’t until 2019 that Nyong’o and Spencer finally got starring vehicles to call their own, while Ali, now a two-time Supporting Actor winner, is still waiting to shoot his first real movie lead. Shouldn’t their Oscars have qualified them for such a glow-up long ago? When I look at this year’s Leading Actor categories, where white performers are safely ensconced and every actor of colour is thought to be an on-the-bubble pick for Oscar, I wonder if Hollywood is still locked into a pernicious pattern. Things aren’t much better for female filmmakers, who continue to be regarded by awards groups as figures on the fringe. The Golden Globes, Directors Guild of America and Bafta all nominated a list of five men for the top directing prize, despite a sterling year for women behind the camera. That means those Best Director races left out Greta Gerwig (Little Women), Lulu Wang (The Farewell), Lorene Scafaria (Hustlers) and Céline Sciamma (Portrait of a Lady on Fire), among other worthy contenders. And while the DGA category for first-time filmmakers included exciting new voices like Mati Diop (Atlantics), Alma Har’el (Honey Boy) and Melina Matsoukas (Queen & Slim), none of those women earned a nomination for the DGA’s top feature-film trophy. ‘Little Women’ director Greta Gerwig has been shut out of Best Director nominations (AP) Instead, the guild nominated Martin Scorsese (The Irishman), Quentin Tarantino (Once Upon a Time in Hollywood), Sam Mendes (1917), Bong Joon-ho (Parasite) and Taika Waititi (Jojo Rabbit). Both Bafta and the Golden Globes substituted Joker director Todd Phillips for Waititi, but no matter how you slice it, these are male-dominated movies, and nearly all of them feature a panoply of violent acts (with murders that include stabbings, hangings, shootings and death by flamethrower). We’re conditioned to think of these sorts of films as more “important” since they’re what the Oscars have historically canonised, but the result is that the latest crop of movies by women, films that are more human-sized and less murder-strewn, are afforded little awards consideration. Even the male-directed contender Marriage Story, with its comparatively intimate focus on a family navigating divorce, has had trouble launching its filmmaker, Noah Baumbach, into the Best Director category over a slew of men telling more muscular stories. The Oscar trend lines here are not encouraging. Despite saving a slot two years ago for Gerwig’s Lady Bird, the Best Director category has become increasingly focused on audacious technical spectacle, the likes of which women are rarely allowed to make. So many of the female directors in contention this year had to tell their stories with slim budgets and striking visual economy, while the men often had big money, complicated shots and engorged running times at their disposal. Alas, when it comes to awards voters, the most directing is often considered the best directing. And unless women are given more money and freedom to make their films, or voters come to understand that a performance-driven drama is every bit the directorial achievement of a whiz-bang war movie, female filmmakers may continue to be shut out. When pressed about these sorts of snubs, awards voters will often deflect: their job, they insist, is merely to select the best possible contenders, regardless of race or gender. Still, the homogeneous group of gatekeepers that came before us still affects so much of what we consider worthy of canonisation. Changing those entrenched attitudes will require not just diverse membership rolls, but a willingness to investigate who and what we deem important. It won’t be easy to celebrate the wins to come when it’s clear that so much is still lost.
Martin Scorsese is the most alive he’s been in his work in a long time, brimming with renewed passion for filmmaking and invigorated by the reception that has greeted his latest gangland magnum opus, The Irishman. And what he wants to talk about is death. Just to be clear, he’s not talking about the deaths in his movies or anyone else’s. “You just have to let go, especially at this vantage point of age,” he says one Saturday afternoon. Download the new Independent Premium app Sharing the full story, not just the headlines The 77-year-old director is stretched out in a comfortable chair in a living room of his Manhattan townhouse, a seat he rises from several times when a whimsical mood strikes him during a spirited conversation about mortality and its inevitability. As he explains, Scorsese is talking about setting aside his expectations for The Irishman. But he also meant relinquishing physical possessions: “The point is to get rid of everything now,” he says, in his trademark mile-a-minute clip. “You’ve got to figure out who gets what or not.” And the last step in this process is to let go of existence itself, as we all must. “Often, death is sudden,” he continues. “If you’re given the grace to continue working, then you’d better figure out something that needs telling.” He found that inspiration in The Irishman, his mammoth dramatisation of the life of Frank Sheeran (Robert De Niro), a mob enforcer who claimed to have killed Jimmy Hoffa (Al Pacino). It was not an angst-free undertaking for Scorsese – his movies never are – as he struggled with the idea of making another film set in the world of organised crime and hesitated about pursuing the project with Netflix instead of a traditional studio. But what compelled him to abide these uncertainties was a story that went well past the scope of Goodfellas or Casino, to the waning days of Sheeran’s life, when he is left alone to contemplate the morality of his deeds. In words that Scorsese knew would resonate beyond the framework of The Irishman he says, “It’s all about the final days. It’s the last act.” He may occasionally talk like someone with nothing left to lose, when he is candidly holding forth on comic book movies, the treatment of women in his films or what he feels is his tenuous place in the current film industry. But Scorsese remains deeply invested in his career, after more than half a century, and while The Irishman could easily provide a fitting coda, he has no intention of stopping here Robert De Niro as Frank Sheeran in ‘The Irishman’ (Netflix) What motivates him now, he says, is not fear of death but acceptance that it happens to everyone, an understanding that provides him with perspective. “As they say in my movie, ‘It’s what it is,’” he says. “You’ve got to embrace it.” Like the man himself, Scorsese’s home is a monument to filmmaking. Aside from the stately fireplace portrait of Gouverneur Morris, a Founding Father and ancestor of the director’s wife, Helen, the most prominent decorations surrounding him are oversized posters of beloved films by Jean Cocteau and Jean Renoir, including three for Grand Illusion in this room alone. Across the hallway is the dining room where he had edited portions of The Irishman, Silence and The Wolf of Wall Street. Scorsese is perpetually reliving this history, telling tales of revelling in Citizen Kane when he watched it on a butchered TV broadcast years ago or being awestruck when John Cassavetes, a hero and mentor, was given what seemed like the princely budget of $1m to make Husbands, his 1970 comedy-drama about men in midlife crisis, for Columbia Pictures. Being an avid film fan is no guarantee that you’ll be a great filmmaker. But Leonardo DiCaprio, who has starred in five of Scorsese’s features, says that the director’s cinephilia never causes him to lose sight of what his performers need. “He’s learned as much as he can about the history of his art form and he’s brought that all into his filmmaking process,” DiCaprio says. “But he’s always focused on what the actor gives, and that one-on-one dynamic. Plot to him is secondary. His focus is finding the heart of the story through the actors that he works with.” Scorsese has equally vivid memories of his childhood, growing up in Little Italy where his formative influences included his parents, his Catholic priests and the local hoodlums who would inspire films like Mean Streets. If his past movies tended to glamourise criminals and the violence they perpetrate, Scorsese says, “Well, it is glamorous and attractive, is it not? It’s glamorous at first if you’re young and stupid, which a lot of people are. I was.” His youth was also an initiation into the culture of death: serving as an altar boy for requiem masses at St Patrick’s Old Cathedral (“‘Dies Irae’ was my favourite song,” he says), helping a friend deliver floral arrangements to funeral services. As a teenager, he lost two friends in close succession – one died of cancer, another in an accident – and one of the burials, at a graveyard near a factory, left a lasting impression on him. “I said, ‘This is what it comes to?’” Scorsese recalls. “To squeeze us in a little plot of land in Queens somewhere, against this ugly, destructive backdrop? It was a shock and an awakening – an awakening to what, I’m not sure, but a change.” An eye for macabre details and an unflinching willingness to depict them have served Scorsese well, but somewhere around the making of his Vegas mob saga Casino (1995) – particularly the scene in which Joe Pesci’s character is beaten to death and buried in a cornfield – the director began to wonder if he had pushed this skill set to its limit. “I said I can’t go any further with it,” he recounts. Over the next two decades, he largely avoided projects in the crime-drama genre. (An exception was The Departed, for which he finally won an Academy Award.) But whatever the subject matter, Scorsese says he felt drained by these films, usually near their conclusions, when he inevitably found himself butting heads with studio executives who wanted the running times shortened. “The last two weeks of editing and mixing The Aviator,” a co-production that included Warner Bros and Miramax, among others, “I had left the business from the stress,” he recalls. “I said if this is the way you have to make films then I’m not going to do it anymore.” Leonardo DiCaprio stars as director and aviator Howard Hughes in Scorsese drama ‘The Aviator’ (IMDB) He did not quit, of course, but he has increasingly turned to independent financiers to back his projects, believing that he and the studio system had become mortal enemies. “It’s like being in a bunker and you’re firing out in all directions,” he says. “You begin to realise you’re not speaking the same language anymore, so you can’t make pictures anymore.” When De Niro approached him with the source material for The Irishman, in the midst of work on another potential Paramount film they would ultimately walk away from, Scorsese did not necessarily see it as an opportunity to make a grand pronouncement on his body of work or the mafia milieu. “I saw it as a danger,” he says, fearing that it would be dismissed as yet another mob drama on his CV. The only reason to do The Irishman, Scorsese says, was if it addressed ideas he hadn’t previously confronted. “Is it going to be enriching?” he asked himself. “Are we going to learn about the invisible, the afterlife? No, we’re not.” But the film could say something about “the process of living and existence, through the work we could do – you could depict it, the actors could live in it”. And he could not resist the story of criminals whose lengthy life spans become a curse that burns their misdeeds into their souls. He quotes a lyric from the Bruce Springsteen song “Jungleland”: “They wind up wounded, not even dead’,” Scorsese says. “And that’s even worse, in a way.” The Irishman, he says, was not a repudiation of his previous crime dramas nor an expression of regret for how he’d depicted their swaggering characters. “I don’t think it’s regret,” he says. “This is different. Here, it’s the dead end, and everybody has to reckon at the end. If they’re given the time. And that’s where we’re headed.” Pacino, Scorsese and De Niro attend the international premiere of ‘The Irishman’ at the BFI London Film Festival on 13 October 2019 (AFP/Getty) The Irishman took more than a decade to make, and as its cast grew to include Harvey Keitel, Pesci and Pacino (who had never worked with Scorsese), the director could feel the stakes getting higher. That anxiety of influence was palpable, too, for collaborators like Steven Zaillian, the Irishman screenwriter, who strove not to duplicate other Scorsese films. “It’s very hard to get all his movies out of your head and not write a scene that’s reminiscent of another scene – ‘Oh, oh, that’s what I did in Goodfellas or that’s what I did in Casino,” Zaillian says. But such pressures also led to innovations like the captions that appear throughout The Irishman, describing how various criminals eventually met their fates. Pacino, though a novice to Scorsese’s process, says he nonetheless developed an easy shorthand with the director and found him unafraid to express his opinion, in his own unique manner. After one take, Pacino recalls, “I have a memory of Marty looking at the scene on a computer and sticking his head out of the tent that he was in, as if to say, ‘What the f*** are you doing?’ He didn’t actually say those words, but it felt like it. And I got the message.” With a laugh, Pacino adds that he welcomed such indications that a director was invested in his performance. “Actors like that,” he says. “You think, I’m glad you’re seeing me and I’m glad you’re actually evaluating what I’m doing. It’s saying, we’re not alone here.” De Niro, who has starred in nine features for Scorsese, says the director’s openness to experimentation and in-the-moment discovery has remained a constant throughout their decades-long collaboration, dating back to Mean Streets (1973). “If he feels that something’s not within the parameters, that it’s too out-there, he might say no, or he might even say, ‘Try, let’s see,’” says De Niro, who is also an Irishman producer. “He can always cut it out. That gives you freedom to try things and it makes everybody comfortable.” But De Niro says he and Scorsese also share a kind of fatalism – the expectation that any time their work is celebrated, a barrage of rejection will swiftly follow, even in the case of The Irishman, which has been widely acclaimed. “You’re waiting for, what’s the bad?” De Niro says. “What’s the downside? What’s going to happen? The other shoe to drop. You’re saying, yeah, this is great, but let’s not all get too excited.” In ways both subtle and substantial, Scorsese sees the world changing and becoming less familiar to him. He gratefully accepted a deal with Netflix, which covered the reported $160m (£122.7m) budget for The Irishman. But the bargain meant that, after the movie received a limited theatrical release, it would be shown on the company’s streaming platform. That means some viewers are watching the three-and-a-half-hour movie incrementally, instead of in one sitting, as its director would prefer. But Scorsese says he’d rather the film be available somewhere, in some form, than nowhere. “Even if it’s going to be shown on a street corner, maybe someday it’ll be shown in a theatre as part of a retrospective,” he says. “I really thought that.” Netflix said The Irishman was watched by more than 26.4 million accounts in its first week on the site, but the realm of smartphones, tablets and streaming devices is largely invisible to Scorsese Sarcastically describing his day-to-day reality, he says, “I go out, they put me in a car, they take me somewhere, they take me out, put me back on a table, take me in. I go in a room, somebody talks to me, I say, ‘Yes’. Then I come home and try to get in this door without the dogs going crazy.” He is capable of adapting and evolving: in his fifth marriage (he and Helen wed in 1999), this former one-man tempest recast himself as a homebody and family man. They have a daughter, Francesca, and he has two daughters, Cathy and Domenica, from his first two marriages. But you also know that Scorsese is hardly a wallflower if you’ve followed his recent remarks against Marvel movies, which he said were “not cinema” and closer to “theme parks” in an October interview with Empire magazine. (He expanded on these remarks in a November op-ed in The New York Times.) That prompted Robert A Iger, the chief executive of the Walt Disney Co (which owns Marvel) to tell Time magazine that Scorsese’s remarks were “nasty” and “not fair to the people who are making the movies”, adding that he was seeking a meeting with the director. Scorsese tells me that he had reached out to Iger several months earlier, on behalf of his nonprofit Film Foundation, which is seeking to restore and preserve movies in the 20th Century Fox library that Disney now owns. “Then all this came up,” Scorsese says with a chuckle. “So, we’ll have a lot to talk about.” (A Disney spokeswoman said the company was trying to set up the meeting between Scorsese and Iger.) Scorsese has also been faulted by critics and others who have said that the female characters in The Irishman are not fully realised and exist only to react to the male characters; as their prime example, these critics often point to Anna Paquin, who plays the adult incarnation of Sheeran’s daughter Peggy and who has almost no dialogue. But the director argues that Paquin’s character – whose wordless rejection of the ageing Frank devastates him – was in no way diminished by her silence. As Scorsese explains, “Don’t go for the surface. The surface says, ‘I’m going to say something and there’s going to be two or three big scenes between me and my father’. She doesn’t need to. She saw what he did. She knows what he’s capable of.” The director believes Anna Paquin’s character wasn’t diminished by her silence (Netflix) Scorsese says he was aware of the wider debate about the representation of women in his films, acknowledging that The Irishman is a “more sequestered” movie but not solely representative of his body of work. Emma Tillinger Koskoff, who is president of production at Scorsese’s Sikelia Productions company and has made films with him for more than a decade, vehemently rejects the notion that Scorsese has historically overlooked women. “It’s silly,” she says, adding that Scorsese “is responsible for some of the greatest female characters in cinema history”. She cited the roles played by Ellen Burstyn in Alice Doesn’t Live Here Anymore, Lorraine Bracco in Goodfellas, Jessica Lange and Juliette Lewis in Cape Fear and Sharon Stone in Casino, among others. Koskoff also notes that Scorsese has supported female directors by helping to produce films like Joanna Hogg’s The Souvenir. “I could go on and on and on,” she says. “He’s not making Lady Bird but it’s not like he’s opposed to that.” Scorsese is circumspect when asked about movies from the past year that he had enjoyed, pleading modesty and the fact that he still needed to watch a lot of films, though he says he had seen and liked Bong Joon-ho’s dark satire Parasite. And he is well aware that Joker, the hit comic-book thriller, contained many homages to his own work – he had passed on an offer to help produce it, though Koskoff worked on the movie – but does not seem to be in a hurry to view it. “I saw clips of it,” Scorsese says of Joker. “I know it. So it’s like, why do I need to? I get it. It’s fine.” Despite his professed aversions, Scorsese is going back to the Hollywood studios for his next movie, Killers of the Flower Moon, which is adapted from David Grann’s nonfiction book about the murders of Osage Indians in 1920s Oklahoma and which will be financed by Paramount. Scorsese has other aspirations but they have nothing to do with filmmaking. “I would love to just take a year and read,” he says. “Listen to music when it’s needed. Be with some friends. Because we’re all going. Friends are dying. Family’s going.” One impediment, Scorsese admits, is himself and a disposition that compels him to tell stories in the medium he knows best. “I’ll read a book or I’ll meet a person and I’ll say, ‘Ah! I’m going to make a film on this’,” he explains. “Over the years I’ve been able to do it. Now it’s narrowing way down.” Then there is the other boundary – you know, death. But just because it’s unknowable and non-negotiable doesn’t mean it isn’t worth contending with every day. “The problem is, time is limited and energy is so limited – the mind, also, of course,” he says. “Thankfully, the curiosity doesn’t end.” The Irishman is available to watch on Netflix
When the ballot results came in to decide the first winner of the Oscar for Best Actor, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences realised they faced a tricky problem. The “actor” who had collected the most votes was actually a dog called Rin-Tin-Tin, who had starred as Rinty in popular films such as A Dog of the Regiment and Jaws of Steel. The film board were concerned that awarding the first statuette to a canine would hardly give credibility to their new awards. To avoiding appearing to be barking mad, they diverted the 1929 Oscar to Emil Jannings. The academy awarded some honours in their inaugural year for performances in more than one film. Jannings won for his portrayal of both a bank clerk in 1927’s The Way of All Flesh, and for playing Grand Duke Sergius Alexander in the 1928 film The Last Command. Looked at through the long lens of history, the decision backfired. A committee who were so worried about the embarrassment of honouring a dog ended up commemorating a man whose career ended in ignominy as a reviled propagandist for Adolf Hitler. The Oscars snubbed a German shepherd and got a Nazi poodle instead. Download the new Independent Premium app Sharing the full story, not just the headlines At the end of the Second World War, with Hitler and his minister of propaganda Joseph Goebbels dead, Jannings is said to have rushed towards the allied troops marching into Berlin, clutching his golden statuette and yelling: “Don’t shoot, I have won an Oscar!” He was not imprisoned, but his reputation was in tatters. The man once considered the world’s greatest actor never worked again. Ninety years on from that historic award, it’s no surprise that the academy don’t talk much about their first Best Actor winner The strange story of Jannings began in Rorschach, Switzerland, with his birth on 23 July 1884. His father Emil, a well-to-do American businessman from St Louis, died when the future actor was a child. His mother, Margarethe, moved the boy, who was christened Theodor Friedrich Emil Janenz, to Görlitz, in the far east of Germany. Jannings ran away from home at 16 to become a sailor, but quickly decided that he wanted to be an actor. His first break came when he joined Max Reinhardt’s theatre company in Berlin in 1906. He landed his first film role in 1918 when, using the name Emil Jannings, he starred in Die Augen de Mumie Ma (The Eyes of the Mummy). He quickly established himself as one of the talents of the German silent film industry, starring in acclaimed films such as Othello (1922), The Last Laugh (1924) – which Alfred Hitchcock described as “almost the perfect film” – and Variety (1925). His work attracted the attention of Hollywood and, in 1927, he was lured to America with a lucrative contract from Paramount Pictures. Paramount gave him extraordinary control over scripts, roles and choice of directors. In the next two years, he made six silent films in America, including Betrayal with Gary Cooper. Betrayal, along with The Patriot and Street of Sin, is considered lost forever. He was popular with American movie fans, and he sought to overcome any doubts about his place in American society by dissembling, telling the press he was born in Brooklyn. Jannings fitted in with the social whirl of Hollywood – there are pictures of him sitting with a swimsuit-wearing Greta Garbo – but to some of the actors with whom he worked closely, he was a moody despot. German-born Fritz Feld, who appeared in 140 films including Hello, Dolly! and Herbie Rides Again, told film writer Michael Dobbs that during the making of The Last Command Jannings took him aside and said he wanted to sack director Josef von Sternberg and put Fritz in his place. Fritz declined to behave treacherously and Jannings screamed “You fool! You god-damn fool!” at him. When The Last Command was made, Jannings was 44 and carried the baggage of three short-lived marriages that had ended in divorce. He was estranged from his two children. Although he wed again, to a former Berlin cabaret performer and actress called Auguste Maria Holl (who was always known as “Gussy’), it didn’t stop him from making advances towards other actresses. Evelyn Brent played William Powell’s love interest in The Last Command. In her biography, The Life and Films of Hollywood’s Lady Crook, she recalls that after being snubbed, Jannings went round telling the film crew that Brent “wasn’t his type”. When she heard about his slurs, the 32-year-old, who had been appearing in films since 1917, confronted him. When he asked why she was not interested in a love affair, she replied coolly, “because you’re 10 years too old and 40 pounds too fat”. Brent said he was a temperamental and spoilt man. “Emil Jannings could get sulky over trifles,” Brent said. “He didn’t like the fur coat I was wearing in one scene, and when I took it off and laid it aside on the set, he used to go over and kick it, for all the world like a petulant kid.” His bizarre behaviour extended to male colleagues. Paul Henreid, the Austrian-born actor who played Victor Laszlo in Casablanca, was a teenager when he acted with Jannings that year. In Michael Druxman’s book Hollywood Snapshots, Henreid said he had a minor role as a character who was killed. In a subsequent scene, Jannings was scripted to stand beside a closed casket supposedly containing the remains. Jannings told Henreid that it was essential he got the “right feeling” to play the scene and ordered the nervous novice to lie in the coffin with the lid closed. Henreid remained there for half an hour before finally summoning the nerve to look out. Jannings had gone to lunch and left him in the coffin. Oscar nominations for Best Picture announced Jannings won his Oscar for his performances in The Last Command and 1927’s The Way of All Flesh, another film that is presumed lost, apart from five minutes of extant footage that is held at the UCLA Film Archive in Los Angeles. When the first Oscars were officially presented, on 16 May 1929, the winners were revealed three months ahead of the ceremony, by which time Jannings was already back in Germany. A photograph showing him holding the statuette had been taken months before by the Paramount publicity department. The Oscars night he missed was a very different affair to the global extravaganza of modern times. There were only 270 guests in the Blossom Ballroom of the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel that first year, and the ceremony was not broadcast on radio or television. Janet Gaynor, the 22-year-old winner of the first Best Actress award (she was nominated again in 1937 for her role in the original A Star is Born), wore an off-the rack dress she had purchased months before. Gaynor, incidentally, had her own sad postscript when she died in 1984 from abdominal injuries suffered in a collision with a drunk driver. When he posed with his Oscar, Jannings seemed to have a bright future. His commanding stage presence and skills as a wonderfully expressive actor had made him an acknowledged great of the silent era. Even Brent conceded that he was “a splendid actor”. But many of the actors eating their broiled chicken that first Oscars party knew that storm clouds were gathering. All the gossip was about the success of The Jazz Singer, which had won two Oscars, and what the first talkie would mean for the industry. It was clear that actors would now be required to talk on screen. Although Paramount screen-tested Jannings, they quickly decided that his thick German accent was not what they wanted. He rejected their offer to over-dub his voice. Emil Jannings and Evelyn Brent in the Josef Von Sternberg’s ‘The Last Command’ (Getty) Sensing that his career in America was doomed, Jannings returned to make films in Germany. In an article in April 1929 in the Los Angeles Times, film critic Edwin Schallert described him as “the king of the European film stars”, adding that “his going marks the close of a picturesque phase of Hollywood’s history”. At first, it seemed as though things might turn out well in his homeland. In 1930, Jannings made Der Blaue Engel (The Blue Angel) with Marlene Dietrich. He earned plaudits for playing an elderly professor who is destroyed by his infatuation for a cabaret singer called Lola-Lola. In the book Modern Times, Stanley Kubrick says that one of the greatest moments in film history was “the way Emil Jannings took out his handkerchief and blew his nose in The Blue Angel”. Dietrich, however, came to loathe Jannings and dismissed his acting skills as that of an “old ham”. Hitler’s inexorable rise to power in the early 1930s coincided with a decline in demand for Jannings’s services. In March 1933, by which time Hitler had assumed a grip on Germany, Goebbels was appointed as Reich minister of public enlightenment and propaganda. Goebbels believed that Jannings would be a useful tool for the Nazis and suggested he work on propaganda films. The first to come to fruition was 1935’s Der alte und der Junge König (The Old and the Young King), in which Jannings portrayed Prussian King Friedrich Wilhelm I. This historical biopic was intended to extol the idea of Führerprinzip, which, simply put, is the concept of blind obedience to the leader (Führer). The Berlin-born director Veit Harlan was in Goebbels’s good books after divorcing a Jewish actress called Dora Gerson (who was later killed at Auschwitz, along with all her family) and he was chosen to draw a strong performance from Jannings in 1937’s Der Herrscher (The Ruler), another film aimed at promoting Führerprinzip. Jannings was still considered an actor of renown in Europe and The Ruler was shown in England. Graham Greene, who was working on his novel Brighton Rock, reviewed the film for The Spectator and mocked the star actor’s depiction of the loyal boss of a munitions firm. “In Der Herrscher, Herr Jannings has the meaningless gaze of a sea lion with huge sloping shoulders and watery whiskers to whose emotions we apply for want of anything better, such human terms as pity, anger, terror, though we cannot tell, on the evidence of those small marine eyes, whether he is really registering anything more than a dim expectation of fish,” wrote Greene. Back in the Fatherland, though, the film pleased the Führer, who had previously gone out of his way to praise Jannings’s performance in Traumulus (The Dreamer). The close ties between actor and dictator were sealed when Jannings campaigned for Hitler in the 1938 elections, the final ones for the Reichstag during Nazi rule. His show of loyalty earned him a lavish lifestyle and career advancement. Goebbels placed Jannings on the board of Tobis Films and gave him “overall artistic control” of the state studio’s films. His first project for Tobis was to produce and act in a biopic about the German microbiologist Robert Koch, who experimented on colonial African subjects. A portrait of Emil Jannings, circa 1930 (Getty) The 1941 wartime film Ohm Krüger (Uncle Krüger) was to prove the most controversial of all Jannings’s films. Goebbels wanted something to stir up German audiences in advance of a possible invasion of Britain. He allocated a budget of around 6 million Reichsmark (around £22m now) for a film celebrating the life of Paul Kruger, the man who led the Second Boer War fight against the British at the end of the 19th century. Jannings, who was the producer, launched a press campaign to promote his portrayal of Kruger. He described British imperialism as “a pernicious disease” and put his name to the forward of a reissue of Kruger’s diaries. “President Kruger was the first conscious champion against England, he is an example for us Germans who are now leading the fight against British imperialism. I played him because he was chosen to start a struggle which shall be concluded in our lifetime,” Jannings is quoted as saying in David Welch’s book Propaganda and the German Cinema, 1933-1945. Hitler and his cronies adored the film and Goebbels named Jannings “Artist of the State”. Jannings was also awarded the “Ring of Honour of the German Cinema”. Further afield, Italy’s fascist leader Benito Mussolini praised the film and Ohm Krüger won the Mussolini Cup for best foreign film at the 1941 Venice Film Festival. In the next release, Bismarck’s Dismissal, Jannings played the 19th century Prussian leader Otto von Bismarck who, in 1871, helped unify the German empire. Hitler admired the so-called “Iron Chancellor” and was delighted by Jannings’s flattering comparison of the two leaders. Hitler was just like Bismarck, said Jannings, because they both “represented the same historical situation – one man against the world”. Jannings had become a full-blown propaganda gun for hire. Fritz Hippler, who ran the film department in the Propaganda Ministry, directed the antisemitic film Der Ewige Jude (The Eternal Jew). When Hippler published his book Contemplations on Filmmaking in 1942, Jannings wrote the preface. German historian Frank Noack, who wrote a biography of Jannings in 2012, says that Jannings’s Russian-born mother, who was living in Berlin during the war, had Jewish origins. Although this was never openly discussed in the German press, he speculates that keeping his mother safe was perhaps a factor in his willingness to work for the Nazis. British and allied military officials who quizzed Jannings after the war rejected claims that he had worked reluctantly for Hitler. Jannings was not helped in his pleas of innocence by the contents of Goebbels’s diaries. The minister for propaganda specifically praised the actor’s commitment to the Nazi cause. “He works as though possessed on his Boer film. Jannings outdoes himself. Kruger is as much of an anti-England film as one can only hope for,” Goebbels wrote in April 1941. The allied command in Berlin halted the shooting of his last film – Wo ist Herr Belling? (Where is Mr Belling?) – and decreed that he was subject to “denazification”. He was officially banned from making another film. Jannings retreated to live in Austria, where he was interviewed by a New York newspaper, The Rochester Democrat and Chronicle. The interview was carried out by staff writer Klaus Mann, who had known him in his Hollywood days, and was published on 25 June 1945. Mann described the actor’s “picturesque Lake Wolfgang home” and said that Jannings had “flourished under the Nazis”. When he asked him directly about his involvement with the Nazis, Jannings replied: “Open resistance would have meant a concentration camp”. He claimed he was “ordered” by Goebbels to make the propaganda films. In his autobiography Life and Me, published by Zimmer and Herzog in 1951, Jannings devoted only 72 words to an oblique defence of his work for the Nazis. “There are things one cannot talk about – things that pull us in opposite directions at the same time, as they appear to the head in a different way from the way they appear to the heart, which would like to be in unison with the soul. As my heart and soul belonged to the art of acting, they ordered my head not to worry about things that were none of its concern.” It took some years for the full truth about his propaganda role to become clear to people outside Germany. Even in February 1960, he was still highly enough regarded in America to earn a star on the Hollywood walk of fame, although their present-day website makes no mention of his Nazi past. In November 2004, his Swiss birthplace of Rorschach honoured him with their version of the star. His past was brought up and the subsequent outcry ended with the commemoration being removed a few days later. The official academy website has a section dedicated to their inaugural 1929 awards. They include a picture of Best Actress Gaynor but not of Jannings. In the place where the best actor photograph would seem to naturally sit, there is instead a photograph of Joseph Farnham, winner of the “title writing” Oscar. Jannings has not been entirely airbrushed from history, though. He features as a character in Quentin Tarantino’s war film Inglourious Basterds, played by Hilmar Eichhorn. Jannings appears in a scene in which Goebbels gets him to show the “Ring of Honour” he was awarded for Ohm Krüger to soldier Fredrick Zoller. Tarantino’s fictional Jannings is killed during an attack on the Nazi leadership. In reality, the actor’s final days on earth were painful, dismal and drawn out. He had taken Austrian citizenship and converted to Catholicism, but nothing seemed to bring him peace. He sought solace in heavy drinking, a factor in his death from liver cancer on 2 January 1950 at the age of 65. “He died alone, bitter and in disgrace,” said his biographer, his body ravaged and his legacy tainted forever as a salesman for the Nazis. “The joys and the infinite sorrows, they all end,” reads the epithet on his grave. His Oscar, meanwhile, is on exhibit at the Berlin Film Museum.
Each year, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts And Sciences attempts to award Oscars to the “best” film or artist in each category that year, and each year it fails at least a few times. There is always room for disagreement on what constitutes “best”: how can we possibly compare Toy Story 3, Inception and The King’s Speech? And yet voters did just that in 2010. It is similarly impossible to nail down all the egregious choices in academy history, but here are a few of the most glaring errors. Starting with the granddaddy of them all... Download the new Independent Premium app Sharing the full story, not just the headlines How Green Was My Valley Oliver! March of the Penguins How Green Was My Valley Beat: Citizen Kane to Best Picture, Best Director and Best Cinematography in 1941 It takes a bit of searching these days to find someone who has a) seen John Ford’s Welsh melodrama How Green Was My Valley and b) did not do so out of a morbid curiosity to understand what it had that made it better than Citizen Kane. Still, there are loyal fans in Wales where it is set, willing to overlook the somewhat shaky accents in recognition of its portrayal of the hard lives of coal miners and its generally affecting love stories. But this film didn’t have anything close to the seismic effect of Orson Welles’s masterpiece on generations of filmmakers that followed, and in retrospect is a bizarrely safe, sentimental choice. Oliver! Beat: 2001: A Space Odyssey to Best Director and Best Art Direction in 1968 Credit where it’s due: Carol Reed’s take on the musical version of Oliver Twist is a largely peppy affair that isn’t afraid to dip into darkness where necessary to give Fagin and Bill Sikes their edge. But Stanley Kubrick’s film was – as must have been obvious even at the time – a towering achievement, depicting several million years of evolution. The good news is that Kubrick won an Academy Award for his special effects work on the film, his only competitive Oscar, but he was robbed of Best Director and his film of Best Art Direction. March of the Penguins March of the Penguins (2005) – Trailer Beat: Enron: The Smartest Guys In the Room to Best Documentary in 2005 If more people watched Enron and fewer people watched fairy tales about penguins, the world would be a better place. Luc Jacquet’s Antarctic nature documentary features some stunning photography amid hostile conditions, but it is handicapped by a trashy, unscientific voiceover that keeps emphasising the family “love” that drives these birds – despite the fact that they only mate for a season and never see their young again, once they’re weaned. Alex Gibney’s look at the shocking crash of a Wall Street darling, on the other hand, manages to make dry financial matters feel vital and immediate, and avoids making cutesy claims that the Enron board just couldn’t help being motivated by a near-mystical devotion to money. Crash Beat: Brokeback Mountain in 2005 Even Crash director Paul Haggis doesn’t think his film should have beaten Ang Lee’s delicate, tragic cowboy romance. And yet the academy went for the fragmentary ensemble piece rather than the heartbreaker. Maybe they weren’t ready for a film about a gay couple; maybe the voters thought it was more “important” in some way to reward a film about race issues in LA (something close to their everyday experience that may have felt more immediate, perhaps). But whenever people gather together to moan about bad Oscar choices, this will be mentioned within the first five minutes. Driving Miss Daisy Driving Miss Daisy – trailer Beat: Born On the Fourth of July, Field of Dreams, Dead Poets Society and the not-even-nominated Do the Right Thing to Best Picture in 1989 If you turned on TV one Sunday afternoon and found Driving Miss Daisy, you might think it was a cute, minor picture with some odd, awkward things to say about racism. If someone told you it’s a Best Picture winner, you would rightly scoff. And yet it is, beating four films that have all aged considerably better than the winner. Worst of all was the failure of the academy to even nominate Spike Lee’s blistering Do the Right Thing, which had to make do with a Best Original Screenplay nod and a nomination for Danny Aiello in the Supporting Actor category. Lee would not be nominated for Best Director or Picture until last year’s BlacKkKlansman. The Greatest Show on Earth Beat: High Noon, The Quiet Man and the not-even-nominated Singin’ in the Rain to Best Picture in 1952 Another embarrassing choice: the academy rewarded Cecil B De Mille’s circus extravaganza over Fred Zinnemann’s classic western, High Noon, and John Ford’s Irish favourite The Quiet Man. Worse, they didn’t even nominate Singin’ in the Rain for the top prizes, presumably because it wore its excellence too lightly. The award for Greatest Show tends to be explained away as a sort of career prize for De Mille, but the irony is that he would go on to make The Ten Commandments just a few years later in 1956, which would in turn have made a much better Best Picture winner than Around the World in 80 Days, which beat it that year. But then the winner that year should have been The Searchers, so perhaps that doesn’t solve much. Roberto Benigni for Life is Beautiful Beat: Edward Norton for American History X, Tom Hanks for Saving Private Ryan to Best Actor in 1998 As a film, Life Is Beautiful gets a lot of abuse, but it might have escaped unnoticed if its comic leading man had not won Best Actor at the Oscars and clambered over several rows of the most expensive audience in the world to collect his prize. It’s not a terrible performance, but it’s not even the best Second World War-set performance that year – see Tom Hanks in Saving Private Ryan, and tip your hat to The Thin Red Line along the way. The winner, however, should probably have been Edward Norton on terrifying, terrific form in American History X. Peter Pau for Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon Crouching Tiger Hidden Dragon (2001) – Trailer Beat: Roger Deakins for O Brother, Where Are Thou? to Best Cinematography in 2000 This is not to say that Peter Pau didn’t do beautiful things with Ang Lee’s wuxia epic. But Roger Deakins did pioneering work on the Coens’ O Brother, transferring the whole film to a “digital intermediate” to process and change the colours of the movie to give it a sepia tone. His process became a new Hollywood standard and led to two decades of highly stylised, carefully coloured digital films. In retrospect, his was the greater innovation – and an award in 2000 would have saved the academy nearly two embarrassing decades of not having given Roger Deakins a cinematography Oscar. Helen Hunt for As Good as It Gets Beat: Judi Dench for Mrs Brown and Kate Winslet for Titanic to Best Actress in 1997 Helen Hunt is charming opposite Jack Nicholson in this comedy drama, but even at the time viewers would have struggled to remember her character’s name (it was Carol, for the record). If the win was for supporting actress, the role might have passed muster, but as a lead it has far too little substance to stand against the likes of Judi Dench’s Queen Victoria or even Kate Winslet’s blockbuster action heroine Rose. Through no fault of Hunt’s own, it’s symbolic of the rubbish female roles that abounded – even at the Oscars – at this time. Amy Adams Hasn’t beaten: Anyone yet, despite six nominations It only took five nominations for Leonardo DiCaprio to go from bright young thing to “it’s his time”. Well, Amy Adams has had six nominations across Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress, and she should have been nominated for Arrival as well in 2016, so we need to start an “it’s her time” narrative. She was nominated for Vice last year, but lost out, as predicted, to Regina King, whose performance in If Beale Street Could Talk was heartbreaking. It wasn't quite Adams's time yet. 
The script for Colin Trevorrow’s scrapped ninth Star Wars film has allegedly leaked online, revealing a wildly different adventure to The Rise of Skywalker. Jurassic World director Trevorrow stepped down from the project in September 2017 after reportedly clashing with Lucasfilm boss Kathleen Kennedy. Fans have been perusing the leaked script, which AV Club claims is legitimate, to see in which direction the Star Wars franchise would have gone, had Trevorrow stayed on as director. Download the new Independent Premium app Sharing the full story, not just the headlines If the script is real (Disney is yet to comment on the reports), Trevorrow’s ideas were wildly different to Abrams’. According to the script, the film would have been called Star Wars: Duel of Fates. It’s opening crawl would have read as follows: The screenplay, which is said to have been co-written by Trevorrow and Derek Connolly, has numerous interesting aspects to it, including a darker arc for Kylo Ren (Adam Driver), a heightened role for Rose Tico (Kelly Marie Tran) and absolutely no Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) – you can peruse the biggest takeaways here. 11. Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) 10. Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005) 9. Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999) 8. Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018) Since the release of Abrams’ The Rise of Skywalker last month, it has divided critics and audiences, with some highlighting the movie’s sense of adventure and others criticising it for its moments of fan service. Consequently, the film has a critical score of 54 per cent on review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes – one of the lowest for any movie in the long-running Star Wars franchise. Its audience score sits at 86 per cent, though, which is 43 per cent higher than the score amassed by Rian Johnson’s previous Star Wars film, The Last Jedi. A recent report claims that Abrams was left unsatisfied with several orders made by Disney in relation to his finished film. A full breakdown of Trevorrow’s alleged leaked script can be found on Reddit. Abrams recently revealed what he believes to be the answer to one of The Rise of Skywalker’​s biggest mysteries: what Finn was about to say to Rey before getting sucked into the quicksand in Pasaana. Find a list of every unexpected cameo in the film here. The best in film, music, TV & radio straight to your inbox
Quentin Tarantino has revealed who he thinks is the best young actor working in Hollywood today – and it’s someone who has never starred in any of his films. During an appearance on The Ringer‘s podcast The Rewatchables, the director – who this week picked up his third Best Director Oscar nomination, for Once Upon a Time in Hollywood – elected to discuss the 2010 film Unstoppable at length. Unstoppable, the Tony Scott thriller about a runaway freight train, stars Denzel Washington and Chris Pine, whom Tarantino cited as his favourite young actor. Download the new Independent Premium app Sharing the full story, not just the headlines “I think one of the things that’s exciting about the movie is I am a huge Chris Pine fan,” he said. “Now, to me, of the actors of his age, he’s hands down my favourite – of that group, of that era, of those guys.” He says that while he enjoyed his performance in 2009’s Star Trek, it wasn’t until Unstoppable that he became “a movie star” in the director’s eyes. 30. Stuntman Mike 29. Billy Crash 28. Trudi Fraser 27. Melanie Ralston “I think a case can be made that Pine hasn’t taken the next big leap from Unstoppable,” the director argued. “Frankly, to tell you the truth, he’s been good in other movies [but] he hasn’t had that.” When host Bill Simmons joked that Pine is “waiting” for Tarantino to write him a part, the director said: “I’m the biggest fan of him so if I had the right part, I would – I’d like to.” Loading video Once Upon a Time in Hollywood picked up 10 Oscar nominations earlier this week. Other films in contention for trophies include Joker, which leads this year’s pack with 11 nominations, and The Irishman and 1917, which have 10 each. Brad Pitt is favourite to pick up the Best Supporting Actor trophy for his role of Cliff Booth in Tarantino’s most recent film. Find the full list of nominations here. Last year, Tarantino revealed a rather surprising choice for his favourite film of 2019. The best in film, music, TV & radio straight to your inbox
Charlize Theron has spoken about the challenges of her dramatic transformation as Fox News host Megyn Kelly in the film Bombshell. Theron stars alongside Nicole Kidman and Margot Robbie in the movie about the 2016 sexual harassment scandal at the US network, which led to the firing of CEO Roger Ailes. Her performance has earnt her an Oscar nomination for Best Actress at this year’s awards ceremony, with critics calling it “unnerving”. Download the new Independent Premium app Sharing the full story, not just the headlines Theron, who co-produced the film, told the BBC that she struggled to come to terms with Kelly’s politics before accepting the role. American Psycho (2000) Before Sunrise (1995) The Big Heat (1953) The Big Lebowski (1998) “There are things she’s said in the past that have bothered me,” she said, referring to instances such as Kelly’s defence of people dressing in blackface for Halloween. “But the more I zeroed in on what the film was about, [I realised] it wasn’t a Megyn Kelly biopic, it’s about a year-and-a-half at Fox, and she was a part of many other women who experienced this thing and then ultimately succeeded in doing something that was thought of as impossible,” she continued. “And so once I narrowed it down to that, it became easier for me to make it about that, and whether I have issues with her or not, she was part of something that I think will be a historical marker for women’s rights.” In a review for The Independent, critic Clarisse Loughrey said Theron’s transformation was “a little frightening to witness” and praised the “studied, transformative” performances of the cast. “Bombshell is a hard and complicated story to tell,” she wrote, “but its message is clear: no woman is free from the patriarchy, even if she doesn’t believe in it.” See the full list of Oscar nominations here. The best in film, music, TV & radio straight to your inbox
The circumstances of Jean Seberg’s death 40 years ago in late August 1979 were squalid and pathetic. The American star’s body lay decomposing in a car on a street in Paris for 10 days before the French police discovered it. There was a bottle of barbiturates and a suicide note beside the corpse. As the press reported, her body had “baked in the sun” and the odour was “unimaginably foul”. This was the actress who, at the start of her career, was described as “so unimaginably fresh” by her colleagues. Paris was the city with which Seberg was most closely associated. Every film lover remembers her in Jean-Luc Godard’s Breathless (1960) in her white New York Herald Tribune T-shirt, selling newspapers and gallivanting around the streets with her co-star, Jean-Paul Belmondo. Seberg had one of the strangest and most contradictory careers of any Hollywood star during the postwar years. Download the new Independent Premium app Sharing the full story, not just the headlines “She was so misunderstood. It’s not like you need to hero-worship a celebrity, they are just people you want to look at. The fact that people stared at her and fixated on things that were not real, projections: that really ultimately destroyed her,” Kristen Stewart, who plays her in the new film, Seberg, commented of the ill-fated actress in a Vanity Fair interview. As an actor who has worked on both big Hollywood productions like Twilight and in independent French arthouse features, Stewart seems perfectly qualified to play her. Seberg, out in UK cinemas this Friday, isn’t a straight biopic. Its focus is its subject’s deadly entanglement with the FBI. Days after her suicide, the FBI admitted that its agents had plotted to ruin her reputation as part of their counter-intelligence programme, Cointelpro, authorised by FBI founder, J Edgar Hoover himself. Seberg’s crime, in Hoover’s eyes, was her involvement in political causes and her support of the Black Panther Party. In particular, they were suspicious of her close links with Black Power leader, Hakim Jamal (played in the film by Anthony Mackie). [seberg-kristen-stewart.jpg] Kristen Stewart as Jean Seberg in Benedict Andrews’s film ‘Seberg‘ (Amazon Studios) In 1970, the FBI planted the false rumour that Seberg was pregnant by a Black Panther Party member in order to “cause her embarrassment” and “cheapen her image” with the American public. Their plan worked. It was dispiriting but inevitable that some gossip columnists followed the false leads that the FBI dangled in front of them. From the FBI’s point of view, she was involved in radical politics, had contributed financially to the Black Panthers and was therefore fair game. The story was picked up by gossip columnist, Joyce Haber, who referred obliquely to it in the Los Angeles Times. Newsweek also wrote about it and named Seberg. “Under the ruthless gaze of the FBI, the threads of Jean’s life come apart,” Benedict Andrews, the director of Seberg, pointed out. The assault on her reputation set in motion the events that led to her death a decade later. At the time of the leak, Seberg had indeed been pregnant. In the wake of reading the false stories about herself, she went into labour. Her baby was born prematurely and died a few days later. The woman Hoover set out to crush was the quintessential young American, “the golden sunflower girl” from the midwest, as she was characterised. A pharmacist’s daughter who had grown up in Marshalltown, Iowa, she had won Hollywood’s version of the Lottery by landing the lead role in Otto Preminger’s George Bernard Shaw adaptation, Saint Joan (1957). The autocratic Preminger had launched a nationwide talent hunt for a new Joan of Arc. A reported 18,000 girls had sent in pictures and resumes and 3,000 had been given personal auditions. Seberg got the part. She was the one, as TV show host Ed Sullivan put it, who had “caught lightning in a bottle”. It was the equivalent of Vivien Leigh being cast as Scarlett O’Hara in Gone With the Wind (1939). Seberg and Jean-Paul Belmondo in Jean-Luc Godard’s ‘Breathless’ (Films Around The World) Preminger was the perfect gentleman off-set but, when the cameras began to roll, he turned into a bad-tempered ogre. He used every ruse at his disposal to publicise the film and its new young star. It would have made the perfect story about overnight stardom if it hadn’t been for the fact that the film didn’t turn out very well. By her own admission, Seberg wasn’t obvious casting. She talked about being burnt at the stake twice, first in making the movie and then by the critics. Preminger cast her in a second film, Bonjour Tristesse (1958) but then discarded her. “He used me like a Kleenex and then threw me away”, is how she described her treatment at his hands. The irony is that Preminger had been right all along. Seberg really was a special talent. She had a spontaneity, mischief and lambent grace on screen that immediately enraptured the young critics and would-be filmmakers from Cahiers du Cinéma in France. “When Jean Seberg is on the screen, which is all the time, you can’t look at anything else,” Francois Truffaut enthused about her performance in Bonjour Tristesse. Godard and Claude Chabrol were equally smitten with her. In one of the more bizarre transformations in Hollywood history, the midwestern girl-next-door type became the sacred muse of the French Nouvelle Vague. Seberg was wryly humorous about the effect she exercised on French male directors. “I was their new Jerry Lewis, I suppose,” she told journalist Rex Reed, comparing herself to the American comedian who made goofy films with Dean Martin and was treated with near contempt by American critics but revered as “Le Roi du Crazy” by their French counterparts. “Godard is like a Paul Klee painting, always hiding behind those funny dark glasses,” she suggested, going on to call the French auteurs who worshipped her “very strange little men”. Thanks to Breathless, Seberg also became more highly valued back in Hollywood. Director Robert Rossen, who cast her in one of her greatest roles as the beautiful schizophrenic opposite Warren Beatty and Peter Fonda in Lillith (1964) spoke of her “flawed American girl quality, sort of like a cheerleader who’s cracked up”. She had prominent roles in all-star blockbusters like Airport (1970) and successfully held her own against such scene-stealers as Lee Marvin and Clint Eastwood in Paint Your Wagon (1969). That, though, was the period before Hoover and the FBI set about destroying her just as surely as Otto Preminger had tried to create her as a star in the late Fifties in the first place. Preminger and Hoover bookend her career. The media colluded with those two patriarchs, building her up and then knocking her down. Elements of Seberg’s story are utterly heartbreaking. As Alistair Cooke told British listeners in one of his Letters from America broadcasts the week after her death, she took her prematurely born baby’s corpse back home to Iowa “in a glass coffin as a glaring proof that the baby was white – an excessive reaction perhaps but in 1970, she knew that the FBI could and did destroy hundreds of radicals and non radicals”. On each anniversary of the baby’s death, her then-husband Romain Gary later revealed, she had attempted suicide. Seberg as the beautiful schizophrenic who starred opposite Warren Beatty and Peter Fonda in ‘Lillith’ (1964) (Glasshouse/Rex) Seberg continued to work throughout the 1970s, making an experimental film with Philippe Garrel and collaborating on projects with her third husband, Dennis Berry. She wrote to Ingmar Bergman, the great Swedish director, telling him that she looked a little like Bibi Andersson, who had starred in Bergman films from The Seventh Seal (1957) to Persona (1966), and expressing her fervent desire to work with him. The letter is kept in Bergman’s archives. He received it and read it – but didn’t deign to reply to it. If Seberg was feeling marginalised and paranoid in her final years, you could hardly blame her given the FBI harassment, the upheaval in her private life and the alarming way her career had begun to creak. As her biographer David Richards notes, she was putting on weight, drinking too much and seemed to be in a state of permanent “psychological siege”. By the late 1970s, she was close to being forgotten. Her death, though, put her right back on the front pages. The public was reminded of just how abominably she had been treated both by Hollywood and by the FBI. There was a sense of frustration over talent that had never been properly fulfilled. Then again, as is pointed out in Mark Rappaport’s dramatised documentary, From The Journals of Jean Seberg (1995), most of her films may have been “mediocre”, but she made one or two “great ones” and that is more than in most careers. Now, with Stewart portraying her on screen (and already being talked up for awards), Seberg is likely to be rediscovered all over again Seberg is released in UK cinemas on 10 January
Jared Leto’s new film might look like another comic-book origins story – but it gives a glimpse into the thorny corporate politics behind Hollywood’s most marketable franchise A coup for Sony … the MCU film Morbius, with Jared Leto as antihero Dr Michael Morbius. A coup for Sony … the MCU film Morbius, with Jared Leto as antihero Dr Michael Morbius. Photograph: Sony Who’s that muscular, ripped, pasty-looking fellow wrenching the dregs of his comic-book movie career from the deathly places of despair? Why it’s Oscar-winner Jared Leto, who played Joker in 2016’s misfiring Suicide Squad turned Marvel’s latest big-screen antihero. The first trailer for Morbius has arrived online, apparently designed to confuse the bejesus out of any viewer not intricately acquainted with the corporate politics that lies behind Hollywood superhero flicks. Morbius (full name: Morbius the Living Vampire, also known as Dr Michael Morbius), is not part of the established Disney-owned Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). But he is a graduate of the Marvel comic books, having debuted in 1971 as a villain in The Amazing Spider-Man #101 before morphing into a more sympathetic figure who ended up with his own series. Yet it’s not so simple, because through a maze of corporate shenanigans, the character does exist in the same world as Iron Man, Captain America, Thor and the rest. The key figure here is Spider-Man, whose film rights are owned by Sony, which agreed to lend them back to Marvel for 2016’s Captain America: Civil War and 2017’s Spider-Man: Homecoming. And fans enjoyed that new MCU iteration of Peter Parker, gamely played by British actor Tom Holland, to the extent that last year’s Spider-Man: Far from Home (a Sony-Marvel co-production) made more than $1bn at the worldwide box office – Sony’s highest-grossing movie ever. So what did Sony do? The studio promptly threatened to pull Spidey from the MCU in a battle over share of profits. The spat was resolved, and Holland is now due to appear in at least one more Marvel film, as well as a further Spider-flick from Marvel-Sony. All of this becomes relevant when we watch the trailer for Morbius, because it is clear what a coup Sony has pulled off by aligning itself with the MCU. At first the film appears to be standard comic-book origin story stuff: a skinny and desperately ill Morbius injects himself with something freaky in an attempt to cure a rare bloody disease. All of a sudden he’s hugely muscular and has developed superhuman speed and strength. It all looks a bit like a passable knock-off of DC’s Batman movies, especially with all those shots of bats flying from dark crevices and talk of Morbius developing natty echo-location skills. But then we spot a mural of Spider-Man that’s been sprayed with “murderer” – a reference to Peter Parker being framed in the end-credit scenes of the MCU’s Spider-Man: Far From Home. And then the Vulture himself – Michael Keaton’s Adrian Toomes, the villain last seen in Spider-Man: Homecoming – turns up to virtually high-five our hero. There are presumably limitations here to crossover potential – don’t expect Thor to drop in – but this remains a remarkable development. With presumably little control over Sony’s Marvel movies (and Sony hasn’t produced a truly decent comic book film by itself since 2004’s Spider-Man 2), Disney is allowing its rival studio to suggest to fans that these films are all part of the same tapestry of superhero flicks. In Hollywood terms, this is like Quentin Tarantino allowing Uwe Boll to use characters from Pulp Fiction in his latest venture. This appears to be the price of keeping Spider-Man in the MCU. Whether Sony’s corner of Marvel turns out to be worth its salt – 2018’s Venom was pretty “meh” – or even makes sense as a sort of darker, gothicly furnished annex to the main Disney mansion, remains to be seen. Sony certainly seems to have got an incredible deal. But given that it seemed committed to withdrawing Spider-Man from the MCU altogether, just as we were all starting to enjoy Holland’s version of the character, we should perhaps be thankful for small mercies.
Though the calendar reads 2020 we’re still waiting for the future promised in 2001. Stanley Kubrick’s 1968 film, created concurrently with Arthur C Clarke’s novel, is recognized as one of the most influential motion pictures ever made, endlessly scrutinized from both a story and production point of view. Both avenues are open to New Yorkers and visiting tourists from 18 January through 19 July at the Museum of the Moving Image adjacent to the Kaufman Astoria Studios in Queens. Envisioning 2001: Stanley Kubrick’s Space Odyssey is an in-depth examination of how the New York-born director’s desire to make “the proverbial ‘really good’ science fiction film” (as Kubrick wrote to Clarke in a letter preserved under glass in the exhibit) led to “the ultimate trip”, as MGM’s marketing department called the movie once young people seized upon the heady, ambiguous film that exploded into sound and light to go “beyond the infinite” in its most notable sequence. That section of the movie – the stargate scene – is what greets you as you climb the stairs to the museum’s third floor. There are also smaller screens offering clips from films that directly influenced Kubrick when he was dreaming of the future. To the Moon and Beyond, created for the 1964 World’s Fair, sits beside the George Pal-produced Destination Moon. Jordan Belson’s experimental shorts and the Soviet-influenced Czech masterpiece Ikarie-XB1 flank the National Film Board of Canada’s 1960 short Universe, narrated by future voice of HAL 9000, Douglas Rain. During the press preview, Kubrick’s eldest daughter, Katharina, said “teenage boys made that movie a success”, as she detailed the initial critical drubbing her father’s vision of tomorrow faced on release, and how counting the walkouts with a clicker during the premiere left the director “feeling depressed”. When she heard a radio DJ call it “groovy”, she knew it might catch on. “Today,” she continued, “young people are very enthusiastic about the film. It’s Goat [greatest of all time], or whatever it is,” she joked, mentioning its frequent revivals and the recent Christopher Nolan-led “unrestored” release. Her father’s exhaustive research is made wonderfully evident in the exhibit with large amounts of correspondence on show, awaiting a deep dive. No detail in the finished film wasn’t thoroughly discussed between the production team and groups like the Rand Corporation or Ordway Research. One can also inspect the deals with groups like Hilton Hotels or Parker Pens because even an arthouse masterpiece from the 1960s made room for spon-con. The model ships, drawings, sketches, costume tests, helmets, props, walls of index cards and apeman suits are what one expects from an exhibit like this, but what grabbed me most was a special section dedicated to the stargate sequence. I’ve read about Douglas Trumbull’s creative use of the split-scan technique (which the twentysomething tinkerer essentially invented on the fly) but I’ve never quite understood it before. Seeing the enormous schematics and large-format photos finally brought that home. Not that I’d ever let go of the suspension of disbelief. With the eerie György Ligeti music piped in (and, elsewhere, Aram Khachaturian and Strausses both Richard and Johann) one is quickly reminded that all this behind-the-scenes magic wouldn’t mean much without the ideas Kubrick and Clarke dreamed up. “It doesn’t tell you what to think,” Katharina Kubrick says of the film, the first of her father’s works she was old enough to see on its release. (“I certainly wasn’t allowed to see Lolita,” she joked.) “Who you are is how you receive it,” she continued, adding that her father remained a “proud Bronx boy” who would receive VHS tapes of New York football and baseball games from his sister when the family lived in England. The film’s New York roots are a point of pride for the museum. Kubrick and Clarke’s first meeting was held at the long-gone midtown bar Trader Vic’s. Clarke, already living in Colombo in modern-day Sri Lanka, was in town to work on Time-Life Library’s Man and Space. The pair talked through the story in Kubrick’s frenetic apartment with three energetic young daughters on Lexington Avenue, his office on Central Park West and on walks between the two. When physical production moved to Borehamwood in Hertfordshire, Clarke stayed on at Manhattan’s Chelsea Hotel to work on the novel. 2001: A Space Odyssey was the first film the Museum of Moving Image programmed after its rather Kubrickian remodeling job in 2011. (The architect Thomas Leeser admitted to the movie’s influence, according to opening remarks at the press event.) The film has screened 46 times to packed houses at the museum since 2011, one of the few spots left in New York with exquisite 70mm projection. The new exhibit comes to New York after a successful run at the Deutsches Filminstitut & Filmmuseum in Frankfurt. It represents all of the 2001 elements (with “amplification”) from a larger Stanley Kubrick show that toured London, Los Angeles and numerous other cities. With six months of Envisioning 2001 in the upstairs gallery, many special guests like Douglas Trumbull, 2001 actors Keir Dullea and Dan Richter and the director of the Carl Sagan Institute, Lisa Kaltenegger, are booked for accompanying film screenings. In addition to 2001 on both 70mm and digital, programs include films that inspired Kubrick, were influenced by 2001 or are notable “outer space speculators”. From now until July, Queens, New York is the ultimate trip. Envisioning 2001: Stanley Kubrick’s Space Odyssey will be showing at the Museum of the Moving Image, New York, from 18 January to 19 July.