For three years, I’ve spoken at schools about video games and social media. The small groups of parents who have attended often tell me similar stories: their sons and daughters are “addicted” to Fortnite, to Pokemon, to Minecraft, and they feel powerless about what they can do. When I tell them about parental controls – built-in tools on all games machines that let you limit access to games – many are bewildered or agitated, even though such controls have been a feature of console design for a decade. Video game trade body Ukie has launched a campaign to encourage more parents and carers to use parental controls, teaming up with ex-footballer Rio Ferdinand. The organisation wants to raise awareness that everything from screen time to in-game purchases can be monitored and controlled. Last year, an NSPCC study found that only 19% of parents with children aged five to 15 use family controls on internet-connected devices. In my experience, many parents both dread and disdain video games. I’ve seen parents at my talks despair at being asked to engage with an Xbox or PlayStation console – it’s a totally alien environment for some, and one they occasionally feel aggressive antipathy for. But simply succumbing to technophobia is not acceptable today. According to the Internet Advertising Bureau, 99% of children in the UK aged eight to 15 play video games regularly. And they watch video game influencers on YouTube, Twitch and Instagram. Presenters such as Ali A, Ninja and DanTDM are watched by millions of children, in a role that is a mix of pop idol, children’s TV presenter and surrogate older sibling. Children are utterly immersed in this world. It’s not enough to wave it away, or just to take notice when the latest moral panic hits the tabloids. We teach our kids to cross the road, to swim and ride a bike, to be wary of strangers – these are considered vital stages in learning to navigate the lived environment. But the digital environment is as much a part of our kids’ lives. As Ukie’s Jo Twist puts it: “If a child was given a bike at Christmas, we would expect them to also be given stabilisers – family controls are no different.” Ukie’s campaign, called Get Smart About PLAY, takes a sensible approach to the problem. It encourages parents to play games with their children, talk about the games, then ask them what they think. Ultimately, though, parents must be responsible for what their children experience on consoles, smartphones and PCs. They have to take control. But it’s not easy, because the rules have to evolve as a child grows up – and the hardware itself gets upgraded. It was easy for me to monitor my sons when they were younger and wanted to play Minecraft and Lego Star Wars together on our old Xbox 360. But now they’re 12 and 14, and they want to play complex, sometimes violent multiplayer games with friends. I have to think about how they can speak to those friends online, while limiting their access to strangers; I have to decide which forms of combat I’m happy with them experiencing and where to draw the line. The cartoonish gunplay of Fortnite and Overwatch are fine, but I don’t want them playing the more realistic militarised violence in Call of Duty. I let them play the 18-rated assassination sim Hitman because it’s basically a glorified puzzle game, but I don’t let them play Grand Theft Auto V with its lurid combination of sex and brutality, and its casual misogyny. I’ve no idea how successful Ukie’s campaign will be. At every talk, I recommend two things: that parents play video games with their kids so they understand what’s going on, and that they visit Ukie’s excellent website AskAbout Games, which has information for parents about new titles. But I often observe expressions of indifference and uncertainty on their faces. I understand the last thing many adults want to do is play Fortnite – or even worse, to boot up an Xbox and work out how to navigate through the nest of menus to find the screen time controls. And I understand frustration with the ever-changing demands of consumer electronic devices. But our kids aren’t living in the same world as us. Trite as it might be, the phrase “digital natives” is accurate. Children play, communicate, flirt, share, organise and understand the world through devices; games such as Fortnite and Minecraft are social venues, like the park, like the back of the bike sheds, or the youth club, or that wall outside the petrol station – and we can’t help them navigate these spaces if we remain technological agoraphobics. It surprises me, a gamer since the late 70s, that in 2020 we’re still having to point out that parental controls exist. But figuring games and games consoles out is not only an important part of parenting, it can actually be a really fun part of being a parent. It’s time to pick up a controller and start pushing buttons.
Players of the popular online shooter will be able to lay down their weapons and watch exclusive footage Fortnite exclusive … Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker. Fortnite exclusive … Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker. Photograph: Epic Games The next trailer for Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker will not be shown in the cinema or on TV – it will be in Fortnite. At the Game awards in Los Angeles on Thursday night, director JJ Abrams announced that exclusive footage from the film will be revealed live within the game on Saturday evening. Anyone playing the popular battle-royale shooter at that time will be able to head to the Risky Reels area of the map and watch on a large screen. Star Wars-themed outfits, gliders, pickaxes and emotes have been launched into the game’s item shop. It’s the latest and most ambitious example of Fortnite being used as a live marketing attraction. To promote Avengers: Infinity War in 2018, Disney tied up a deal with Fortnite developer Epic Games, for a limited-edition Infinity Gauntlet mode, in which players were able to take part in the game as that movie’s villain, Thanos. A similar tie-in was launched for Endgame. In February, dance music artist Marshmello performed a live concert from within the game, attracting an audience of more than 10 million. Fortnite: Battle Royale has more than 250 million players and has remained one of the most popular video games in the world since its launch in September 2017. With its huge, hard to reach audience of teenagers and twentysomethings, the game has become a focal point for advertisers, with sponsored streams and tie-ins with popular Fortnite influencers such as Ninja. The Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker event is due to start at 7pm GMT on 14 December.
The machine previously known as Project Scarlett will be four times as powerful as Xbox One X with a range of next-gen features Xbox Series X Xbox Series X Photograph: Microsoft Microsoft has revealed the name for its new games console – Xbox Series X. The machine, previously known by the codename Project Scarlett will launch in “Holiday 2020”, and will ship with a redesigned version of the Xbox wireless controller. The new name was announced during the annual Game awards in Los Angeles. At the event, a promotional trailer was shown for Senua’s Saga: Hellblade II, a sequel to the critically acclaimed adventure title from UK developer Ninja Theory, which is being designed to leverage the capabilities of the new technology. In a blog post, Xbox chief Phil Spencer introduced the Xbox Series X as “our fastest, most powerful console ever”, claiming it will set a new bar for performance and speed. “Its industrial design enables us to deliver four times the processing power of Xbox One X in the most quiet and efficient way, something that is critically important in delivering truly immersive gameplay.” The specifications of the machine were revealed earlier this year, including its custom AMD Zen 2 processor, capable of delivering visuals at 4K resolution and at 60 frames per second, with the possibility of 120fps rates and supporting 8K displays. The machine features a solid-state drive to allow for faster loading times. According to Microsoft, it can be stood vertically or horizontally. The Xbox Series X is also set to offer backwards compatibility with Xbox One and previous Xbox machines. No official release date has been given beyond the Holiday 2020 announcement, the same period that Sony is set to launch its competing PlayStation 5 machine.
Royal Mail’s set of 12 postage stamps traces Britain’s role at the forefront of the games industry through the 1980s and 90s Four of the new stamps: Wipeout, Dizzy., Micro Machines and Populous. Four of the new stamps: Wipeout, Dizzy, Micro Machines and Populous. Photograph: Royal Mail Group A new set of postage stamps will celebrate the history of the British video game industry, from groundbreaking space sim Elite to blockbusting action adventure Tomb Raider. Each of the 12 stamps in the collection features an image from a memorable and influential game, tracing the history of the industry from the 1980s. Also featured are classic titles such as Dizzy, Populous, Lemmings and Sensible Soccer. “The UK has been at the forefront of the video games industry for decades,” said Royal Mail spokesman Philip Parker. “In the 1980s and 90s young designers grappled with coding on the new microcomputers and set the template for the industry with iconic games. We celebrate some of their landmark creations on stamps.” The 12 games were selected with the help of games industry trade body UKIE as well as veteran video game journalist Julian Rignall, who worked on seminal gaming magazines Zzap!64 and Mean Machines, and Sam Dyer, creative director at Bitmap Books, which specialises in retro video game publications. The set begins in the mid-80s, focusing on the work of development studios such as Bullfrog (Populous) and Codemasters (Dizzy, Micro Machines), before moving into the 90s with titles from Liverpool-based publisher Psygnosis (Lemmings and Wipeout), Derby’s Core Design (Tomb Raider) and Wakefield’s Team17 (Worms). “This collection celebrates a selection of the great British video games that have helped define both the national and global development scene over decades,” said Jo Twist, chief executive of UKIE. “Video games are a key part of our cultural footprint.” The stamps will go on sale on 21 January.
Last year, sector was larger than entire gaming industry combined, report finds esport player plays on his smartphone The report found mobile gaming was also responsible for the majority of time spent using smartphones last year. Photograph: Aaron Favila/AP The vast majority of money spent on mobile app stores went to games, according to a report, as did the majority of time spent on phones, and the majority of advertising revenue. In 2019, more than $86bn (£66bn) was spent on mobile gaming, making the sector larger than the rest of the games industry combined. That revenue represented 72% of all App Store spend, according to data from the analytics firm AppAnnie, in its State of Mobile 2020 report. “If you’re sitting there thinking, ‘I’ve just learned to write code, what should I do?’,” said Paul Barnes, AppAnnie’s managing director for EMEA, “you should make a game.” ”Outside of games, there’s another story of dominance, with the old system of paying upfront to download apps all but dead. On iOS, in-app subscriptions contribute 97% to non-gaming spend within apps (one-off in app purchases, typically either “unlocks” for full versions or content downloads, made up the other 3%), while non-gaming subscriptions overall grew to represent 28% of the spend on app stores. That growth is driven in large part by a few hugely successful subscription based apps, including Netflix, China’s Tencent Video and Tinder, which was the highest grossing mobile app in the world last year and the second highest grossing across the last decade. Of the top 250 apps by spend, 94% are monetised through in-app subscriptions. Not every aspect of the mobile economy is covered by the report, however. Spend through e-commerce apps, which is not charged through in-app purchases, cannot be counted; nor can subscriptions, such as those for most major news apps and Spotify, which are bought through web browsers rather than the subscription tools provided by Apple and Google. Developers have good reasons to seek alternative ways of taking revenue. Both Apple and Google charge substantial fees for in-app payments, peaking at 30% for the iOS App Store. For that reason, Barnes predicts one of the biggest conflicts of 2020 will be around who gets to dodge those fees. “Avoiding App Store fees, like we’ve seen Amazon and Fortnite do over the last few years, is going to play out in 2020,” Barnes said. Amazon has always required Kindle users to buy ebooks on its website, avoiding Apple’s cut, while Epic Games dropped Fortnite from the Google Play Store in 2019 in favour of launching its own Android App Store, where it could reap 100% of the revenue. “Already, though, the revenue through those sources reflects extra hidden growth in the mobile ecosystem.” The report highlights a number of other areas of opportunity over the next year, including: Ride-sharing apps, where the UK has the most concentrated market among those analysed, with Uber taking the vast majority of business. The possibility of the company losing its license to operate in London, however, combined with the recent entry of incumbents such as Kapten and Bolt, could change that, Barnes suggested. Monzo, which had the highest year-over-year growth in downloads of any finance app in the UK. In most countries, the “breakout” finance apps provided single-service feature sets, from payments to security, but Monzo, as a fully featured bank, points to Britain’s mature fintech ecosystem. Two other banks, Starling and Revolut, were also in the top five UK fintech apps by growth. TikTok’s growth shows no sign of stopping, with global time spent in the app growing three-fold over the course of 2019. But it was a little-known anonymous Q&A app called Yolo that had the highest growth in both the UK and US over the past year, pushing TikTok into second place. Across all the markets analysed, people spend three hours 40 minutes on their phones each day, a 35% increase on 2016, while the average “Zoomer” – a member of Generation Z, born between 1997 and 2012 – spends nearly four hours a month on each of their top 25 non-gaming apps, and more again in mobile games.
Fantasy-figure seller’s shares hit record high as franchise goes from strength to strength Warhammer figurines The Warhammer tribe keeps growing, putting the company in great shape, says the Game Workshop’s boss. Photograph: james.anderson/Games Workshop Group PLC Games Workshop is hoping to replicate the success of hit fantasy TV shows such as The Witcher with a new series based on its Warhammer 40,000 tabletop game. As the high-street fantasy-figure seller’s shares hit an all-time high, the company said a series based on the Eisenhorn books, set in the game’s dystopian universe, was in development. The novels follow the adventures of the Imperial Inquisitor Gregor Eisenhorn as he scours the galaxy for heretics and demons. The Games Workshop chief executive, Kevin Rountree, said work on the show was progressing well as the company reported record half-year sales and profits. “No production contracts have been signed yet,” he said. “Our experts continue to work with our external partners learning how this industry works to ensure, if it does go into production, our first TV show is not only true to our IP but is a commercial success too.” The update came as the retailer bucked the high street gloom with year-on-year sales up 16% to £145.6m in the six months to 1 December. Sales last month were “in line” with expectations, the company added. Pre-tax profits jumped 44% to £58.6m, sending the shares up 9% to £69.60 on Tuesday, valuing the group at close to £2.3bn. Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk The Nottingham retailer and model manufacturer has been a sleeper success story with its shares more than doubling in the past year as its Warhammer franchise goes from strength to strength. The number of people logging on to Warhammer-community.com was up 48% in the period, with fans returning to the site more frequently. “Our business and the Warhammer hobby continue to be in great shape,” Rountree said. “We are pleased to once again report record sales and profit levels in the period. The global team have worked their socks off to deliver these great results.” He also pointed to the success of its new Citadel Colours paint range, which comes in shades such as “ork flesh” and “blood angels red”. The company had delivered a step change in its paint offering, Rountree said.
PC; Urban Games/Good Shepard Entertainment There’s much joy to be had building freight networks and watching cities grow … but what about the real-world pitfalls? Transport Fever 2 All aboard … Transport Fever 2. Photograph: Good Shepard Entertainment As Britain returns to a daily commute beset with fare hikes and failing rail companies, there is significant appeal to a game in which you make the trains run on time. In the same way The Sims allows thirtysomething millennials to experience the fantasy of home ownership, so Transport Fever 2 lets you enjoy the thrill of plonking a bullet-train between Brighton and London Victoria. The concept of the transport sim is nothing new. Video games have been offering virtual train sets since Sid Meier’s Railroad Tycoon, letting players enjoy locomotive logistics without requiring a shed to store all those model networks. But Transport Fever 2 goes way beyond laying railroads. Everything from planes to pontoons can be deployed to carry commuters and cargo to your chosen destinations. The broad goal of Transport Fever 2 is to make money by connecting cities to things they need. Any given level will have multiple settlements dotted across the map (given real-life names generated at random), all of which demand differing resources and goods. Let’s say Bolton needs bricks. This requires you to connect a quarry to a brickmaker’s, then link that brickmaker’s to the city. How you approach this is up to you. You could build a sequence of truck depots at each point, then set a bunch of lorries to a cargo route following that line, or you could establish a railway line at the same three points instead. You receive funds for successful deliveries at each point along the line, but each new bit of infrastructure has its own running costs. Trucks are cheap but slow, while trains are initially expensive but faster and carry larger loads. The same goes for transporting people. Airports cost a fortune to build and maintain, but shuttle more passengers to more destinations quicker than a bus route. It’s also worth noting your infrastructure evolves not only in size but across time, with horse-drawn carts and steam trains gradually being replaced by cruise liners and supersonic jets. The three-part campaign offers set objectives that range from establishing new railroads during the American gold rush to modernising the transport links of Victorian Glasgow. Like Th e Sims or Cities: Skylines, however, Transport Fever 2 is largely about creating your own entertainment in the “free game” mode. The enjoyment stems from seeing cities grow and thrive as your network becomes more complex, finding ways to make routes more efficient, or simply watching the lovingly designed vehicle models follow their routines. Transport Fever 2 isn’t short of detail but it does lack depth in certain areas. Most of the challenge occurs at the start of a game, with even a single locomotive putting a hefty dent in your bank balance. Yet once you’ve carved out some basic routes, your finances quickly start to self-perpetuate, with no real brakes on your runaway money train. Transport Fever 2 fails to dig into some of its more interesting new features, such as emissions. Here, the transport routes you create generate pollution over time, slowing city growth in areas with poor air quality. Given the significance of emissions in our own transportation networks, their addition to the game is welcome. But it’s little more than side-system when it should be one of your most pressing concerns. Then again, perhaps letting your private transport conglomerate rake in obscene profits while the world chokes on its exhaust fumes is entirely appropriate. Transport Fever 2 doesn’t need to be a firebrand vehicle for climate activism, but having such themes inform the systems more closely would give it a little more personality and relevance. As it stands, this is a pleasant if not particularly distinctive game that may provide frustrated commuters with hours of transport therapy.
Gods and Monsters With its painterly, storybook aesthetic and promise of a wide-open hero’s adventure, this mythological Ubisoft adventure will intrigue anyone who’s patiently waiting for a sequel to Zelda: Breath of the Wild. From the developers of Assassin’s Creed: Odyssey, it sends the player out to face creatures drawn from the gnarliest Greek legends and rescue the gods. Release date: February (PC, PS4, Xbox One, Xbox Project Scarlett, Google Stadia, Nintendo Switch) Ori and the Will of the Wisps A platform game for anyone who thinks video games are too easy these days, Ori draws its play inspiration from classics such as Mario, Mega Man and Metroid, but its looks are bang up to date. Guiding a spirit through an intensely beautiful forest, you’ll come up against puzzles and obstacles that challenge both your mind and your reflexes. Let’s hope they’re still sharp. Release date: 11 February (PC, Xbox One) Final Fantasy VII Originally released in 1997, Final Fantasy VII is one of the most beloved and acclaimed role-playing titles of all time. Under the direction of principal character artist Tetsuya Nomura, the remake is a complete update of the ecologically themed adventure with rebuilt environments and a modern, highly customisable combat system. Expectations are high and early hands-on reports suggest we won’t be disappointed. Release date: 3 March (PS4) Animal Crossing: New Horizons Nintendo’s legendarily adorable time-sink returns – only this time, instead of starting a new life in a town populated by kooky animals, you’ve got a whole deserted island to shape to your desires, making everything from furniture, houses and signage to neat threads. As ever, the true joy will be found in being invited to other players’ paradises and nicking their fruit trees. Release date: 20 March (Nintendo Switch) Doom Eternal A direct sequel to the 2016 Doom reboot (which brilliantly updated the classic formula with lashing of gore and incredible turbo-charged pace), Eternal doesn’t mess too much with the format. You’re still the Doom Slayer, charging through a hellish landscape blasting demons with shotguns or dismembering them with chainsaws. This time however, you can dissect your fallen foe to discover new weapons and ammo. Release date: 20 March (PC, PS4, Xbox One, Google Stadia, Nintendo Switch) Half-Life: Alyx It might not be the Half-Life sequel that fans have been praying for since Half Life 2: Episode Two, but this VR-exclusive return to the legendary sci-fi shooter series might be as close as we get. Set between Half-Life and Half-Life 2, the action follows resistance leader Alyx Vance as she fights back against the Combine. Designed specifically for virtual reality headsets and motion controllers, this could be a groundbreaking gaming experience. Release date: March (PC) Cyberpunk 2077 The latest open-world role-playing adventure from the creators of the Witcher series, Cyberpunk 2077 promises an epic dystopian fantasy filled with prosthetically enhanced hacker gangs, devastating weapons and sprawling neon-lit cityscapes. You’re a mercenary on the hunt for a life-extending augmentation, and how you get it is entirely up to you. If that isn’t enough, it stars Keanu Reeves. Release date: 16 April (PC, PS4, Xbox One, Google Stadia) Grounded Think Honey, I Shrunk the Kids as a cooperative survival game, where everyday objects and common bugs are massive and pose a sudden threat to your team of miniaturised kids in a suburban garden. Grounded looks characterful, colourful and approachable where survival games are often grim, unforgiving and unwelcoming. Release date: spring 2020 (PC, Xbox One) The Last of Us Part II Naughty Dog’s post-apocalyptic adventure ended in a fittingly ambiguous way back in 2013, so the sequel, which takes place five years later, has a lot of work to do. Ellie is now 19 and, although monstrous mutants and deadly cults still roam America, she is living in a seemingly peaceful settlement – until a tragedy occurs setting off a brutal revenge narrative. Expect violence and emotion in equal measure. Release date: 29 May (PS4) Ghost of Tsushima Not confirmed for 2020 but likely to be a PlayStation 5 launch title, Ghost of Tsushima is an absurdly good-looking samurai game that pays loving tribute to the classic films of the genre. If you’re excited by the idea of tense life-or-death swordfights under falling cherry blossoms, this is one to watch. Release date: Summer 2020 (PS4) Tell Me Why Another game about teen emotions from the developers of Life Is Strange, Tell Me Why is about a pair of twins, one of whom is a trans man, reckoning with the events of their childhood in small-town Alaska. Their differing recollections of events should introduce interesting narrative tension. Release date: mid-2020 (PC, Xbox One) Overwatch 2 Blizzard Entertainment’s bright first-person shooter added much-needed character to the online multiplayer gaming scene – but offered little in the way of narrative. The sequel brings new characters and maps as well as a full story mode, pitching our heroes against the Null Sector robot army in co-operative quests, while replayable “hero missions” allow characters to unlock new items. More of an expansion than a conventional sequel, it promises plenty of fresh challenges. Release date: TBC (PC, PS4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch) Minecraft Dungeons A promising spinoff from the multimillion-selling construction game, Minecraft Dungeons puts players into groups of four adventurers raiding stylishly blocky tombs and tunnels to find treasure and kill enemies. There’s no building to do, just lots of traps, puzzles and monsters to contend with and a host of procedurally generated worlds to explore. Release date: TBC (PC, PS4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch) Watch Dogs: Legion The innovative open-world adventure returns with another critique on surveillance capitalism, this time set in a London that has become a technologically advanced police state. Players align with local members of the DedSec hacking group, recruiting new activists and striking back against the system. We’re promised a vast, highly detailed version of the near-future capital and a thrilling resistance narrative. Release date: TBC (PC, PS4, Xbox One, Xbox Project Scarlett, Google Stadia) Flight Simulator Microsoft’s landmark sim gets its first major update for a decade and, thanks to modern mapping and cloud-computing technologies, it will apparently recreate the entire planet (including 2 million towns and cities) as well as real-world weather conditions. We’re also promised dozens of licensed aircraft and a modifiable simulation engine that alters the flight difficulty, welcoming both wannabe pilots and players who just want to do a loop-the-loop in a 747. Release date: TBC (PC, Xbox One) Fall Guys: Ultimate Knockout It’s about time someone made a game that truly innovated on the battle royale formula – and this looks like it. As with Fortnite, 100 players are dropped into the world until only one remains, but there are no guns. Instead participants have to run through a colourful obstacle course crammed with swinging battering rams and giant boulders until someone reaches the finishing post. Like It’s a Knockout for millennials. Release date: TBC (PC, PS4) Psychonauts 2 The long-awaited sequel to one of the weirdest, best and most underrated platform games ever made, 2005’s Psychonauts. You’re a strange kid with telekinetic powers, journeying through the minds of other equally odd characters, whose preoccupations and personality flaws are writ large. If Tim Burton made games, they’d look a lot like this. Release date: TBC (PC, PS4, Xbox One) Empire of Sin From veteran video game designers Brenda and John Romero, Empire of Sin is your chance to live the life of a mafia boss in prohibition-era Chicago, recruiting, manipulating and occasionally murdering mobsters to spread your influence (and hooch) across the city. A sim game about crime and characters rather than historical battles or city-building. Release date: TBC (PC, PS4, Xbox One, Xbox Nintendo Switch) Vampire: The Masquerade – Bloodlines 2 A game nobody thought would ever see the light of day, given that it’s been 15 years since the last game based on the rich, sexy World of Darkness vampire mythology, Bloodlines 2 is all about the choices that you make and the alliances you forge in the dark. Set in near-future Seattle, it promises an unforgettably brooding story. Release date: TBC (PC, PS4 Xbox One) Halo Infinite Yes, sure, it’s shooting aliens, but Halo has consistently offered some of the best alien-shooting out there, so you can hardly blame people for getting excited about Master Chief and his arsenal of pleasingly improbable sci-fi weapons. Expect awe-inspiring visual spectacle and, hopefully, excellent multiplayer. Release date: winter (PC, Xbox One, Xbox Project Scarlett)
2020 will see Sony’s PlayStation 5 pitched against Microsoft’s Xbox Series X with next-generation revamps and some slick new franchises Animal Crossing: New Horizons; a digital Keanu Reeves in Cyberpunk 2077; The Last of Us: Part II; and Microsoft’s Master Chief in Halo Infinite. Clockwise from top left: Animal Crossing: New Horizons; a digital Keanu Reeves in ‘standout attraction of the year’ Cyberpunk 2077; The Last of Us: Part II; and Microsoft’s ‘ageing space marine’ Master Chief in Halo Infinite. The video game industry has always worked to a lurching rhythm. Every few years the PlayStation 3 evolves, with seamless inevitability, into the PlayStation 4, and so on, each numerical tick of the counter promising fertile turf from which previously inconceivable video game miracles will sprout. This year will mark the next round of the so-called console wars, as Sony’s PlayStation 5 competes with Microsoft’s Xbox Series X (destined to be confused by bewildered grandparents with the current Xbox One X). Like Blur v Oasis, or Star Wars v Star Trek, the true beneficiaries of this kind of tribalistic framing of capitalist enterprise will, surely, be the companies behind the products. As in the past, the rival machines will likely be equivalently powerful and share many of the same games. In an attempt to lure consumers toward their product, Microsoft has pinned its hopes on the closest thing the company has to an exclusive mascot: Master Chief. Halo Infinite hopes to do for the Xbox Series X what Halo did for the original Xbox in the distant technological plains of 2001. That the ageing space marine might convince the zoomer generation to glance away from Fortnite long enough to marvel at the high-definition sheen of his extremely 2000s-era space armour is perhaps doubtful. (Sony is yet to confirm any exclusive games of its own for the PlayStation 5.) As in the film industry, in 2020 video game companies continue to invest the majority of effort and expense to provide old, nostalgia-commanding games with a lick of digital paint. Chief among the renovations is Final Fantasy VII Remake, a vastly expensive project to rebuild the dearly beloved, eco-terrorism-themed 1997 adventure game for modern audiences. Final Fantasy VII is, to a generation of ageing millennial video game nerds, a cultural monolith that, like Star Wars before it, continues to cast a long and consuming shadow over entire identities. So great is the task at hand that the publisher has split the remake into a series of chapters, to be released in stages. How and when the project ends will, no doubt, depend on the success or failure of the opening gambit. Those eager to return to the virtual worlds of their younger days will be similarly delighted by Half-Life: Alyx. It may not be quite the homecoming to City 17 that Half-Life’s faith-keeping fans have clamoured for since 2004, when the last mainline entry to the series was released, but, as a fully featured and exquisitely lavish virtual reality game, this may be a more interesting prospect. You’ll just need a PC of climate-change-quickening-power in order to run the thing. This year will not only see eager returns to dusty franchises. Cyberpunk 2077, a Blade Runner-esque role-playing game starring a digital Keanu Reeves, is the standout attraction of the year. Made by CD Projekt Red, the well-regarded Polish studio behind The Witcher series (an adaptation of which launched on Netflix in December), expect a slickly finished game that allows its players to pick a unique way through the humming city, according to individual whim or character. Regardless of your chosen approach, however, expect a certain baseline of bespattered violence. So, too, in The Last of Us: Part II, the next game from Sony’s cinematically minded, multi-Bafta-winning studio Naughty Dog. Here you’ll play as 19-year-old Ellie, a likable, if troubled teenager who, having survived the various traumas of the first game, must now contend with a death cult operating in a post-apocalyptic United States. If all this sounds too stressful in a world that feels, so often, as if it’s spiralling towards a similar bloody endgame, Microsoft Flight Simulator will offer serene pleasures as you yoke and yaw your way through unblemished skies. Or, if you prefer to conjure your own escapism, Dreams, from the British studio and LittleBigPlanet series creator Media Molecule, provides all of the creative tools required to fashion a soothing reality of your own. If that sounds like too much effort, opt for the long-delayed Animal Crossing: New Horizons, which will allow you to retreat to a virtual village and live out your days in harmony (or passive aggressive co-dependency: no judgment here) with a community of jabbering animals, while you pay off your mortgage via pastoral errands. Bliss.
Among the social media tributes that followed Clive James’s death last month, one broadcaster said that James had privately expressed regret at having spent so much time writing about TV. If true, this was something of a betrayal of the younger James who argued that, as an activity that preoccupies a lot of the nation a lot of the time, television demands serious consideration. In an era when TV critics win the Pulitzer prize and Oscar-winning film directors make Netflix miniseries, the idea that TV is unserious seems anachronistic. Yet, for those of us who cast a similar critical eye over video games, it’s a relatable stance. You’d think that, 40-odd years into the medium’s existence, video games would be over this period of pained self-doubt. Yet many senior industry figures still insist that their games are essentially entertainment. In The Division 2, for example, you play a government agent fighting paramilitary organisations following a shutdown of the US government. “We’re definitely not making any political statements,” Terry Spier, the game’s creative director, told a reporter from the website Polygon before the game’s release in March. Games often borrow politicised themes and aesthetics (October’s Call of Duty: Modern Warfare, for example, allows players to deploy white phosphorus, a chemical weapon prohibited under international law) in order to benefit from the frisson of political relevance. But developers often seem not to consider or contextualise those decisions. But can we really blame companies for claiming that their games are nothing more than a benign pastime when the mere choice of which online store will have exclusive rights can result in thousands of abusive messages (as happened in the case of the husband-and-wife development team who announced that their project Ooblets would be available through just one platform – Epic Store?) Of course, video games don’t need be serious. Often they’re at their best when, as in Untitled Goose Game, the surprise hit of 2019, they enable us to explore the absurd and wilfully silly. Arguably, in a medium that places primacy on the player’s agency to move the story in directions of their own choosing, there’s a case to be made that video games are a poor vehicle for a pointed narrative argument. Also, when a publisher is spending tens of millions of dollars trying to attract the broadest possible audience, dividing that audience along political lines is a risk. Still, it’s a question of ambition, or imagination. And in a medium with such tremendous, unique qualities, why not give it a try – especially when politicians remain so eager to politicise the medium regardless, as Donald Trump did in August, blaming video games (rather than guns) after the mass shootings in Dayton, Ohio and El Paso, Texas? Then again, perhaps ’twas ever so. As James wrote in the introduction of Glued to the Box, a collection of his television reviews published in the Observer between 1979 and 1982: “Television is simultaneously blamed, often by the same people, for worsening the world and for being powerless to change it.” Plus ça change. My top five video games of 2019 1. Untitled Goose Game (PC, Mac, PS4, Xbox One, Switch) The tinkling and benign Debussy soundtrack belies the dark task at the heart of Untitled Goose Game: ruin what might otherwise be a perfectly pleasant day for the village in which you, a mean goose, reside. So you squawk, flap, peck and harass the villagers as you work your way down a series of to-do lists. Funny, well-crafted game-making. 2. Disco Elysium (PC) While Disco Elysium is at its core a computerised Dungeons & Dragons campaign, its story and setting (you play as an alcoholic cop charged with solving a union-related killing in a working-class port neighbourhood) is about as far from fantasy-based swordplay as one can travel. Bracingly written and filled with memorable moments. 3. Outer Wilds (PS4, Xbox One, PC) You have 20 minutes to explore, via a lunar lander, a diminutive, clockwork solar system before the sun explodes. In an apocalyptic Groundhog Day, you resurrect after each ending armed with the knowledge gathered from your previous outing. In this way, you must unravel the game’s secrets across several short lifetimes. Plaintive, mystical and memorable. 4. Telling Lies (iOS, PC/ Mac) In this follow-up to designer Sam Barlow’s Bafta-winning Her Story, you play as a former FBI agent sifting hundreds of hours of footage saved on a hard drive stolen from the National Security Agency. The lives of four individuals at the centre of your investigation intertwine in ways you must fathom via deduction and careful use of precise search terms. 5. Resident Evil 2 (PS4, Xbox One, PC) As in the 1998 original, you arrive as a rookie cop in the midwestern American town of Raccoon City to find its residents shuffling, zombified and hungry for human flesh. Once again, the game’s challenge derives from matching a scarcity of resources to a surfeit of needs. A tasteful and exciting reimagining of a classic. Turkey Left Alive (PC, PS4) With the legacy of Square Enix’s well-regarded tactical war game series Front Mission behind it, and the art direction of Metal Gear Solid’s Yoji Shinkawa fronting it, Left Alive showed promise that merely heightened the disappointment of the rickety, workmanlike results.
At Microsoft’s X019 event in London on Thursday, the company revealed a range of major new titles for the Xbox and PC. But in an industry which has often struggled with representation and diversity of lead characters, one announcement stood out. The latest narrative adventure game from the acclaimed French studio Dontnod will have a transgender man as its lead character – a first for a major game release. Named Tell Me Why, and launching in spring 2020, the game follows identical twins Alyson and Tyler Ronan, who grew up in a small community in Alaska and are reunited after a key event drove them apart 10 years ago. Through the game, the player has to understand what drove the characters from each other, investigating their shared memories while exploring the town and talking to local inhabitants. “The twins are connected by strong supernatural bond, which allows them to share their thoughts and feelings,” explains the game director, Florent Guillaume. “They also have the ability to interact with past memories – to recall and relive them. There are questions of perspective – the two characters see things and remember things differently and you get to choose which you believe, and that shapes the story.” According to Guillaume, the character Tyler wasn’t always going to be a trans man. “We wanted these characters who were born identical to have lived very different lives, and it was while exploring this path that we came up with the idea of having a trans character. “We loved the concept and were determined not to shy away from it. We did a lot of research, we reached out to the community, we wanted to understand their journeys; we consulted with the charity Glaad, which often works with media companies on LGBT+ representation. We were very naive at first, and they enlightened us a lot, they helped us review the script and the characters and to reach out to people.” “Tyler is a fully realised, endearing character, whose story is not reduced to simplistic trans tropes,” said Nick Adams, director of transgender representation at Glaad. “Creating a playable lead trans character – and taking such care to get it right – raises the bar for future LGBTQ inclusion in gaming.” Glaad also helped with the casting of Tyler, who is played by the trans actor August Aiden Black, and the game was tested by trans players – though Dontnod would not confirm whether the development team included any trans staff. “The story is emotional and intimate – we wanted it to touch them,” Guillaume says. “There is a lot of responsibility. We wanted to represent the community accurately. This is not a game about their trans journey, but it is certainly a facet of the game.” As publisher, Microsoft also supported the game’s trans story. “We’re really committed to the idea of gaming for everyone,” says Joseph Staten, creative director on the Microsoft publishing team. “We need to bring in diverse experiences. It’s been really important to do this right, to do it thoughtfully. “Tyler had to be authentic, but also just a courageous, strong, wonderful character. Together with his sister this is an interesting new set of video game characters. This comes from the top: we want Xbox to be a place everyone can play, but we need to demonstrate that in meaningful ways. ” Guillaume sees Tell Me Why as indicative of a growing understanding that video game player-characters need to be more representative. “I think the industry has reached a level of maturity where we can go deeper into diverse stories and experiences,” he says. “Video games have a special ability to connect you with the characters, to allow you to live as someone you couldn’t otherwise be. Through games, we can give players a bridge to the characters – to connect with them, to be comfortable with them.” • Tell Me Why is set to be released over three separately downloadable chapters on Xbox and PC from spring 2020
First released in 1982 – hot on the heels of its rival, Sinclair’s ZX Spectrum – the Commodore 64 became one of the most popular home computers of the 1980s. It was far from user-friendly by today’s standards – even demanding some code be entered just to load games – but it inspired a generation of future programmers and designers, many of whom went on to be influential game makers. At the peak of its popularity, factories were building 400,000 units a month to meet demand. In 2018, it made a comeback, reborn as a “microconsole” preloaded with games. A charming, half-scale replica, the C64 Mini could be plugged into a modern TV, providing access to 64 games. Unfortunately, it lacked two things so important to the Commodore 64 experience: a working keyboard and a decent joystick. Now the the C64 Mini has returned, inflated to a full-size facsimile of the Commodore 64 and rebranded as the C64. This time, it features a functional keyboard and upgraded stick. As a replica, it is captivatingly precise. Placed alongside an original unit, only the logo and USB ports tell you that this isn’t a carefully preserved 1980s model. The new mechanical keyboard is a little softer to use than the original, but it’s an impressive reproduction nonetheless. Even before it is powered up, the C64 is capable of delivering a powerful hit of nostalgia. The Mini was delightfully tiny, but there is something much more evocative about holding a 1:1 scale remake. Once again, a generous 64 games are included, though the list of titles has been revised since the Mini. You won’t find a library of back-to-back classics, but the spread does a superb job of capturing the diverse range of games that made the Commodore 64 so popular. Sports releases Speedball II and California Games, the shooters Paradroid and Uridium, platformer Impossible Mission and puzzler Boulder Dash are among the more celebrated titles included, each bringing entirely solid gameplay. It’s the host of less well remembered gems that bolster the variety, though, including maze game Hover Bovver, ball roller Trailblazer, puzzlers Spindizzy and Chip’s Challenge, and adventure Sword of Fargoal. There is also an engrossing 2017-developed release on board: Galencia, which plays homage to the formative arcade shoot ’em up Galaga, as well as the vintage text adventure Planet of Death, providing a chance to put that keyboard to use. There are a handful of misses too. Alas, Pitstop II really hasn’t aged well. Regardless, the C64 is remarkably easy to use, thanks to the modern interface which lets you select games, adjust display settings to imitate old tube TVs, and save and load titles. Or, you can boot the machine as a classic C64 or Vic 20 and code simple programs. You can also add game ROMs via USB to load new titles into the machine. Securing ROMs of classic games is legally complicated, but the C64 provides a fantastic – if fiddly – means to access the numerous contemporary homebrew games made for the Commodore 64. The joystick, meanwhile, has been upgraded to include microswitches. That means plenty of noisy, nostalgic clicking as you play. More importantly, though, the stick feels responsive and precise. It’s a marked improvement on the Mini’s offering. Take away nostalgia, however, and the C64 is a reminder of how different gaming was on 1980s home computers. Many of the titles may be charming, but they can feel a little stiff and clunky. A good number are demanding not necessarily because they are hard but because they are very counterintuitive. Thirty-something years ago, picking apart how a game worked was so often a part of playing it. Indeed, including digital game manuals would have been a considerable boon to the C64. And while the joystick feels good, it pales compared to modern arcade sticks. The C64 certainly delivers authenticity, but it does so warts and all; it even seemed as if Planet of Death misloaded a couple of times. Still, The C64 is a function-rich, well made, handsome reproduction and includes a diverse and upgradable spread of games. From the colour palette to the crunchy audio, everything is in place to return you to a golden era of home computing.
20 Death Stranding Metal Gear Solid creator Hideo Kojima crafts a strange, highly contemplative dystopian adventure about a deliveryman who must bring hope, along with couriered parcels, to the lonely survivors of a supernatural cataclysm. What we said: This uncompromising, unashamedly political work of artistic intent is 2019’s most interesting blockbuster game by a distance. Read the full review 19 Baba is You The cleverest puzzle game of the year is this series of lo-fi mazes, in which blocks containing nouns, conjunctions and verbs can be rearranged to remix the rules of each conundrum. Ingenious and mind-bending. What we said: From a simple premise, Teikari spins dozens of ingenious challenges … an invitation to play the role of a chaotic god, rewriting the rules of the universe. Read the full review 18 The Outer Worlds Waking early on a ship bound for the furthest human colony in the galaxy is the intriguing start point for Obsidian’s epic and amusing role-playing adventure. With beautiful worlds and interesting characters, this treatise on unencumbered space capitalism is a joy. What we said: The Outer Worlds is vital proof that mid-sized indie teams can take on the big guns at their own game, and leave them looking a little foolish. Read the full review 17 Sayonara Wild Hearts Described as a pop album video game, this joyous adventure sends you scorching through a brash, electric neon landscape, collecting hearts and dodging obstacles to a synth-drenched soundtrack. What we said: Embellishes its ideas in step with its fizzing tracks, which sustain second and third listens as you try to beat your score. Stylish, memorable game-making. Read the full review 16 Horace An overlooked treasure, Horace is both an innovative and brilliant genre-bending platform-adventure game and an unexpectedly moving story about a robot butler, stuffed with references to the pop-cultural obsessions of its British creators. It spirals outwards from deceptively humble beginnings into a sprawling and singularly strange experience. 15 Fire Emblem: Three Houses The grand tactical role-playing adventure returns, this time pitting three regal households against each other in a quest to rule the land. Players swap between battlefields and academy classrooms in a mix of war and romantic entanglements. What we said: By turns grandiose and silly, but always engrossing, this bubbling school soap opera is a game to spend a summer with. Read the full review 14 Sunless Skies A Gothic-horror space exploration game, where every journey between space stations is a life-or-death gamble. Inspired by the novels of HG Wells and Jules Verne, this is a singular sci-fi role-playing game, filled with weird characters fighting it out to survive in a galactic Victorian empire. What we said: Depending on what you want from it, Sunless Skies is a merciless odyssey of oddball sci-fi survival, or a fantasy novel trilogy’s worth of wild, written ideas. Read the full review 13 Observation On a space station floating in the ether, something has gone very wrong – and you watch it unfold not from the perspective of the astronauts, but as the station’s AI. A novel, intelligent space thriller that draws from several cinematic sci-fi greats, and doesn’t suffer by comparison. What we said: An idea so good that you wonder why it hasn’t been done before. It’s unsettling and unconventional, and I was totally unable to turn away. Read the full review 12 Hypnospace Outlaw A supremely clever, funny detective game set in a surreal recreation of the early-90s internet, complete with obscure message boards, dodgy low-bitrate music downloads and MySpace beef. You’ll never have played anything like it. What we said: Rather than lazily pastiching the ugliness and awkwardness of turn-of-the-century web pages, it really conjures that time, when the internet was a place to go rather than a liminal omnipresence. Read the full review 11 Tetris 99 Of all the games to jump on the battle royale bandwagon, Tetris was surely the least expected – but it turns out that 99-player Tetris is genius. Insanely moreish, competitive and just chaotic enough to keep things interesting, this is one of 2019’s best multiplayer games. What we said: Forget serene, calming Tetris, where you arrange blocks into pleasing configurations to make them disappear. This is survival Tetris, where you’re squeezing tetrominos into teensy gaps at high speed as the screen fills. Read the full review 10 Devil May Cry 5 A resurgent Capcom resurrects a dormant series to great effect. The screaming guitars and gothic fashions might be a bit early 2000s, but the hack-and-slash action is unquestionably stylish and the challenge enticing. What we said: It’s bloody, spectacular and irresistible, all cheesy one-liners, guns, swords, explosions, and it plays like a dream. Read the full review. 9 Untitled Goose Game Stealing people’s shoes and glasses, knocking over pints, fleeing from irate gardeners: who could have foreseen the fun there was to be had in waddling around as a horrible goose? There are those who remain resolutely uncharmed by Untitled Goose Game’s ramshackle whimsy, but we are not among them. What we said: Certainly not fowl, most definitely worth a gander, it’s a whimsical little game full of charm and joy, a wonderful experience for just about anyone. Read the full review. 8 Legend of Zelda: Cadence of Hyrule A musical Zelda spin-off that’s suffused with love and respect for Nintendo’s peerless series of colourful adventure games, remixing both the music and the sword-swinging monster-bashing. What we said: Stylish and excellent fun, this tribute captures the excitement and sense of discovery that makes Zelda what it is: a real adventure. Read the full review. 7 Control Supernatural adventure specialist Remedy Entertainment returns with another bewildering sci-fi romp, this time following Jesse Faden of the Federal Bureau of Control, a secretive agency invaded by paranormal forces. Literally nothing – not even the furniture – is what it seems in this dizzying thrill ride. What we said: Remarkably, it all manages to hang together, providing a meaty, exciting and utterly unforgettable video game experience. Read the full review. 6 Telling Lies The follow-up to the fascinating CCTV thriller Her Story uses a similarly voyeuristic interface as you raid stolen National Security Agency archives for phone videos and webcam footage that may or may not implicate a group of characters in a major investigation. What we said: Telling Lies requires a deliberateness from its players that turns us from viewers to active plot participants. It’s a game that doesn’t hold your hand, and ultimately it’s down to you to decide the truth. Read the full review. 5 Apex Legends Titanfall developer Respawn Entertainment takes on the battle royale genre, with 100 players descending on a bright, detailed sci-fi landscape to do deadly battle. Smooth controls, excellent weapon balancing and thoughtful co-op features make this a true contender to the mighty Fortnite. What we said: You can’t really blame this talented team for shooting at the biggest target in modern gaming. And with Apex Legends, it scores a direct hit. Read the full review. 4 Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice Among the most difficult games of the modern era, Hidetaka Miyazaki’s sublime samurai game is punishing, extraordinary and dense with meaning for those with the time and skill to delve into it. What we said: If you have frequent long evenings to throw at its mountainous challenges, you will find here an exquisite game whose subtle themes, gradually unfurling mysteries and beautiful sights reward the determined and skilled player. Read the full review. 3 Resident Evil 2 (Remake) Arguably the finest title in Capcom’s survival horror series is brought chillingly up to date with rookie cop Leon Kennedy and student Claire Redfield exploring a redesigned version of the zombie-filled Raccoon Police Station. All the old monsters and puzzles are there, but not necessarily in the places that veteran players expect. What we said: A reminder of how beautifully crafted survival horror games were in their heyday. From a terrifying orphanage to the festering sewers beneath the city, the feel of the action is always perfectly matched with the aesthetics of the setting. Read the full review. 2 Disco Elysium An amnesiac detective wakes up in a grotty hotel room with the hangover from hell and a murder to solve. From this noir-esque opening comes an open-world role-playing adventure like no other, mixing grim psychodrama with wonderful comic writing. What we said: This is a quietly important game, singular in direction, filled with unexpected, thrilling effects on its player. Read the full review. 1 Outer Wilds Outer Wilds asks you to plumb the depths of space in a ramshackle ship with a primitive clutch of gadgets, probing the mysteries of a capsule universe of bizarre planets without firing any guns or killing any aliens. Survive long enough without getting swallowed by a space creature or crashing fatally into an asteroid and the nearby sun goes supernova – but every time you die, you wake up at the start of a time loop, ready to piece together more knowledge of this mysterious little solar system and progress towards learning its secrets. Offbeat and exceptional, Outer Wilds is a game for the curious and the contemplative, an intricate and endearing space adventure with the ambience of a camping trip.
Players of the popular online shooter will be able to lay down their weapons and watch exclusive footage Fortnite exclusive … Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker. Fortnite exclusive … Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker. Photograph: Epic Games The next trailer for Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker will not be shown in the cinema or on TV – it will be in Fortnite. At the Game awards in Los Angeles on Thursday night, director JJ Abrams announced that exclusive footage from the film will be revealed live within the game on Saturday evening. Anyone playing the popular battle-royale shooter at that time will be able to head to the Risky Reels area of the map and watch on a large screen. Star Wars-themed outfits, gliders, pickaxes and emotes have been launched into the game’s item shop. It’s the latest and most ambitious example of Fortnite being used as a live marketing attraction. To promote Avengers: Infinity War in 2018, Disney tied up a deal with Fortnite developer Epic Games, for a limited-edition Infinity Gauntlet mode, in which players were able to take part in the game as that movie’s villain, Thanos. A similar tie-in was launched for Endgame. In February, dance music artist Marshmello performed a live concert from within the game, attracting an audience of more than 10 million. Fortnite: Battle Royale has more than 250 million players and has remained one of the most popular video games in the world since its launch in September 2017. With its huge, hard to reach audience of teenagers and twentysomethings, the game has become a focal point for advertisers, with sponsored streams and tie-ins with popular Fortnite influencers such as Ninja. The Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker event is due to start at 7pm GMT on 14 December.
The machine previously known as Project Scarlett will be four times as powerful as Xbox One X with a range of next-gen features Xbox Series X Xbox Series X Photograph: Microsoft Microsoft has revealed the name for its new games console – Xbox Series X. The machine, previously known by the codename Project Scarlett will launch in “Holiday 2020”, and will ship with a redesigned version of the Xbox wireless controller. The new name was announced during the annual Game awards in Los Angeles. At the event, a promotional trailer was shown for Senua’s Saga: Hellblade II, a sequel to the critically acclaimed adventure title from UK developer Ninja Theory, which is being designed to leverage the capabilities of the new technology. In a blog post, Xbox chief Phil Spencer introduced the Xbox Series X as “our fastest, most powerful console ever”, claiming it will set a new bar for performance and speed. “Its industrial design enables us to deliver four times the processing power of Xbox One X in the most quiet and efficient way, something that is critically important in delivering truly immersive gameplay.” The specifications of the machine were revealed earlier this year, including its custom AMD Zen 2 processor, capable of delivering visuals at 4K resolution and at 60 frames per second, with the possibility of 120fps rates and supporting 8K displays. The machine features a solid-state drive to allow for faster loading times. According to Microsoft, it can be stood vertically or horizontally. The Xbox Series X is also set to offer backwards compatibility with Xbox One and previous Xbox machines. No official release date has been given beyond the Holiday 2020 announcement, the same period that Sony is set to launch its competing PlayStation 5 machine.
The old gang re-enter the video game fantasy world for more body-swap hijinks and Indiana Jones-ish adventures, and Johnson levels-up his comedy stylings Kevin Hart, Dwayne Johnson, Jack Black and Karen Gillan in Jumanji: The Next Level. Game on … Kevin Hart, Dwayne Johnson, Jack Black and Karen Gillan in Jumanji: The Next Level. Photograph: Hiram Garcia/AP Jumanji is back, activating the time-honoured sequel device of bringing in character actors from the older grandparent generation. It is showing every sign of becoming a very solid family-movie franchise, cheerfully drawing once more on the traditions of Indiana Jones and the body-swap movies of yesteryear. And there is once again a really nice quadrophonic chemistry between its four stars: Dwayne Johnson, Kevin Hart, Karen Gillan and Jack Black (joined by more big names this time around), and the odd-couple comedy bonding of Hart and Johnson. (A noticeable flaw is that Black does not get much of a chance to demonstrate his comedy chops.) In the previous instalment of the franchise, four high-school kids, Bethany (Madison Iseman), Spence (Alex Wolff), Martha (Morgan Turner) and Fridge (Ser’Darius Blain), were catapulted into the VR world of the Jumanji video game, occupying avatars on a mission to rescue someone trapped inside its colossal invented landscape. And Spence got to exist inside the body of alpha-male explorer Dr Smoulder Bravestone, amusingly played by Johnson – an experience that allowed him to escape his wimpy-nerdishness, value himself for who he is, and learn that it’s what inside that counts. Now, a couple of years have gone by, the quartet are at college and things aren’t quite as happy as we might have hoped. Spence is at NYU, lonely, stressed and pining for his bygone triumph in the imaginary world of Jumanji. Without his three friends realising it, he has retrieved the Jumanji game console and has once again made a desperate leap into the digital rabbit-hole. It looks as if the remaining three will have to leap in after him – but now we make the acquaintance of Spence’s crotchety but good-natured grandpa Eddie, played by Danny DeVito, and Eddie’s old codger pal Milo, played by Danny Glover. Through a weird quirk of fate, it is Fridge and Martha who re-enter Jumanji, bizarrely accompanied by wacky old Eddie and Milo, with Bethany left behind, to search out the object of their original quest: Alex, played in the real world by Colin Hanks and in the game by Nick Jonas. They too will wind up in this fantasy universe. So the question of who plays who has been reshuffled and suffice it to say DeVito’s grumpy, pernickety, wisecracking old dude now occupies the mighty body of Johnson – giving Johnson a chance to show his comedy stylings, and pretty impressive they are. It is rare in the literal-minded world of Hollywood (in any genre) to let an actor show off in this theatrical way. As for Glover’s laidback Milo, he occupies the body of zoologist Moose Finbar, played by Hart – and Hart is funny in more or less the way he would have been anyway. Martha is once again biologist Ruby Roundhouse and Fridge is annoyed to find himself inside Jack Black’s body. And where is Spence? Whose body does he inhabit? Well, this is a casting reveal, and it would be unsporting to say more, but more performance comedy ensues. What gives Jumanji its likability is that it has the emphases and comedy beats of an animation, but also the performance technique of live action – and the occasional reshuffling of avatars and players lets the actors show off a little bit further. Jumanji’s next level is rather satisfying. Perhaps the next Jumanji film will experiment with an “acoustic unplugged” version which takes place solely in the real world, or a dark version in which Martha becomes a hip games designer who introduces a Battle Royale element. But my prediction is that fans would be perfectly happy with another episode on the same lines as before. •Released in the UK on 11 December, in the US 13 December, and in Australia on 26 December.
Xbox One (version tested), Switch, PC, PS4; Hello There Games/Wired Productions Made in collaboration with DJ Tim Bergling, this perfect Christmas party game has players zooming across intergalactic landscapes hitting buttons in time to the beat Trippy aesthetic ... Avicii Invector. Trippy aesthetic ... Avicii Invector. Photograph: Hello There Games The search for this year’s Christmas party video game may be over. Following the rejuvenated interest in the “rhythm action” genre brought about by titles such as Beat Saber and Tetris Effect, Avicii Invector takes the cerebral visual immersion of the latter title and plants it in a beautiful, fast-paced beat experience. Made in collaboration with the superstar DJ and producer Avicii, AKA Tim Bergling, before his death last year, Avicii Invector sees you zooming across a series of gorgeous intergalactic landscapes in a WipEout-esque spacecraft, hitting buttons in time to the music on a glowing board reminiscent of the classic Guitar Hero interface. Adding to the trippy aesthetic, the gameplay has you flipping the play space 180 degrees at a time, with interludes of racing through midair rings in time to the beat. Think of Sega’s Nights Into Dreams set to a series of 25 infectious club hits. Avicii’s signature dance music, juxtaposed with this sci-fi setting, makes for a singularly uplifting experience – the game’s retro-futuristic art direction echoing the soundtrack’s mixture of modern and acoustic. With so much emphasis on art and audio, there was always a risk of style over substance. But the almost hypnotic blend of rhythmic tapping and gliding create a compelling flow state experience – at least that’s when you manage to master it. There are three difficulty settings, but even on easy, the game presents a significant muscle-memory-reliant learning curve that will be familiar to Rock Band and Guitar Hero veterans. Progress is rewarded with intercut, voice-acted animations that pop up between levels as your space pilot character, Stella, completes missions across six in-game worlds. A split-screen local multiplayer option turns the game into a party, and this is where it really shines, the anthemic soundtrack making it just as suitable for a pre-club warm-up as it is for Christmas family fun. An early iteration of the game was released in 2017 for PS4 as Invector, but, following Bergling’s death, Hello There Games has finished the project as he intended, with a visual update, new tracks from 2019 album Tim, a multiplatform release, and Avicii branding slapped across it. The latter move could have been a cynical posthumous cash-in, but the result is a fitting musical tribute and an immersive way to enjoy the work of this EDM pioneer. A portion of the game’s royalties will go to the Tim Bergling Foundation, a charity set up by the songwriter’s family to support science-based research into the causes and prevention of suicide, particularly among young people.
Not long ago, my sons, like many other preteens, were obsessed with Fortnite. It was all they played, all they talked about, all they spent their pocket money on. But one rainy afternoon this summer, my youngest took out the D&D starter kit we’d bought him for Christmas and began to study it. Some friends came round and they played for hours. Since then, they haven’t really stopped. This is not an isolated incident. Originally released in 1974, Dungeons & Dragons is having what we now call “a moment”. The company behind the game, Wizards of the Coast, which bought the rights from original creator TSR, estimates that there are currently 40 million players worldwide, with new starters up 25% year on year, as its popularity grows and rules are translated into new languages. Why now? We live in an era of complex fantasy video games such as The Witcher and Elder Scrolls that offer rich, incredibly detailed worlds to explore. In comparison, D&D still uses paper, pencils and dice. Now in its fifth iteration, it offers modernised and simplified rules, but the basic idea remains the same: a group of people sit round a table and pretend to be warriors, mages and elves embarking on imagined quests and deciding the outcome of battles and other climactic events through rolls of the dice. One player is the Dungeon Master – part storyteller, part referee – who uses the game’s instruction books and campaign guides to structure the adventure. It is nerdy, quaint and there is some maths involved. What is going on? The obvious explanation is Stranger Things. The immensely popular Netflix series, which has attracted a huge teen audience, features Dungeons & Dragons as a key element. Not only do the boys in Hawkins play the game, they also use it to understand and contextualise the bizarre phenomena taking place in their small town. When a dimensional tear opens, they name the emerging creatures after D&D monsters. Later, Eleven flips their game board over to explain the Upside Down, with Dustin comparing it to the Vale of Shadows – a craggy, desolate, tomb-strewn area of the D&D world, the Forgotten Realms. Like the 1980s movie The Goonies before it, Stranger Things is like a dramatisation of a D&D campaign: a group of flawed young heroes combining their skills and limited resources to face their fearsome enemies. “Stranger Things definitely put D&D back in the zeitgeist,” says actor and director Joe Manganiello, star of True Blood and lifelong D&D player and advocate. “People who didn’t grow up with it are curious and want to play. There’s an acceptance of geek culture now, because mainstream entertainment has been penetrated by Lord of the Rings and Game of Thrones. A lot of today’s actors, directors and writers grew up playing D&D and you can see that in their shows.” YouTube shows and Twitch livestreams have also played a part. Popular channels such as High Rollers, Critical Role and Oxventure feature funny and engaging players undertaking D&D campaigns over multiple episodes, with participants often dressing up and becoming immersed in their characters. These shows present D&D in an accessible format for young digital natives. There are also a lot of players coming across from video games, their appetite for fantasy adventure whetted by titles such as Final Fantasy and Dragon Age. “Being familiar with role-playing game conventions and fantasy tropes – both found in plenty of games – makes video game players especially receptive to giving D&D a go,” says Jane Douglas, editor and cast member of Oxventure. “Once you give it a go, you start to grasp how much modern games owe to the history of D&D, and all the enjoyable stuff they have in common.” Cementing this connection, the Oxventure cast have just released a Christmas song, Literally Everyone Else in the World, and accompanying video, with proceeds going to the charity Mind. Even the most sophisticated open-world fantasy video game imposes limits on players’ decisions and abilities. Your interactions are mostly restricted to combat or engaging in highly directed multiple-choice conversations, and there is a fixed narrative you have to follow. In D&D, however, everything is seamless and improvised – the Dungeon Master might have a plan, but if the players decide they don’t want to raid the dungeon, and instead want to hang out in an interesting local tavern, a good Master can be flexible enough to indulge that. “With video games, I accept the limitations since only so much can be programmed,” says Shareef Jackson, a cast member on the Twitch stream Rivals of Waterdeep. “But with D&D, my mind and imagination are set free. It made me realise that video games have really been chasing the freedom that D&D has provided all along.” The human contact element of D&D is also vital. In an era when much of our socialising is mediated through phone screens and social media, role-playing is one thing that gets people in the same room. “With digital games, you can play co-op but it doesn’t quite have the connection of real people at a table,” says Richard Whitters, senior art director for D&D. “This is a thing that humans have always done: gathering around the campfire, telling stories, interacting. And for many players, D&D is an event – one person will say, ‘oh, I’ll bring some casserole’, another brings music. It’s a social occasion.” Manganiello says that in his industry, D&D is gaining cult appeal. He now runs a D&D group from his home in Beverly Hills for Hollywood producers and directors – Game of Thrones TV series co-creators David Benioff and DB Weiss are among his regular players. D&D also chimes with the performative element of platforms such as YouTube, Instagram and TikTok – role-playing as a bard or charming thief gives you the chance to create a character and show off to friends. Jane Douglas has called it “improv theatre for nerds”. “It’s really exciting for extroverted introverts like us. You get to perform for your friends, you get to collaboratively tell a story. It’s creative and sociable and intimate, but also there’s winning and losing, and you’re totally invested and present. It’s like improv theatre but with dice and rules, in the best possible way.” As the game’s popularity grows, one major challenge has been to overcome stereotypes – not just the assumption that the game is arcane and complicated, but also that it’s just for young white men. Wizards of the Coast says they are addressing this by employing a more diverse roster of artists and writers and adding racially diverse and LGBTQ+ characters into its official campaign books, as well as working with streamers and influencers from outside the perceived target market. Tanya DePass from the Rivals of Waterdeep stream, which features a cast of POC players, recognises these efforts, but says more needs to be done, both in the game and the team behind it. “I’m really glad to see the changes that have come with the fifth edition. But there are not a lot of POC working at the WotC offices, and we don’t see many brown faces on official streams. We need more staff, not just freelancers, doing work for WotC. But I do feel seen, yes – the inclusion is getting there.” This feels important because from my own experience, D&D can be more than just a pastime. My oldest son is on the autism spectrum and has difficulties with vocabulary and communication. He has responded to the openness and humour of systems within the game. To our immense surprise, he has even started writing his own campaigns, boosting his confidence and comprehension. Many other players have mentioned the game’s mental health benefits. “I can’t make claims about therapeutic qualities, but I wouldn’t be surprised if it had beneficial qualities for some,” says Douglas. “It pulls off the nice trick of being highly sociable and escapist at the same time. Both those things feel restorative, at least to me, and I can imagine other people getting the same benefit.” Bill Benham, who administrates the D&D Adventurers League, agrees. Previously an army medic, Benham would set up D&D games with other soldiers while stationed in Tikrit, Iraq, and credits the game with helping him come to terms with his experiences on active duty. “I have PTSD and I’ve been to counselling at the department of veterans affairs,” he says. “But I’ve also found, working with other vets, that D&D is an effective tool for addressing these issues, because you’re able to engage with something that’s potentially frightening or uncomfortable in an environment where you’re safe, you’re with friends and you’re engaging in an abstract way. By processing these emotions in the game world, you’re better able to process them in the real world.” The run-down, leaky summerhouse in our garden is now effectively a D&D dungeon for our sons and their friends, who bring their own campaign books and dice, staying in there for hours without a screen in sight (though there are apps that help you create your characters or manage your dice rolls). At the same time, many of my games industry colleagues in their 20s and beyond are forming groups. Joe Manganiello told me, only half-joking, that he thinks the game will replace the traditional poker night as a venue for American adults to socialise. D&D artist Suzanne Helmigh expressed it to me very simply: “Being called a geek isn’t bad anymore. It’s cool now.” As adults, we tend to leave make-believe behind. I think that’s a shame. Video games can only partially make up for this loss of narrative exploration and fantasy in our lives; role-playing games answer to an atavistic human need for socio-ritual play and storytelling. They break down barriers, within us and between us. Mark Hulmes from High Rollers sums it up nicely. “Being an awkward teen who was into theatre and anime, playing D&D allowed me explore different personalities and interests. It lets you know which of your friends will try to befriend everyone and who will axe a goblin in the face without asking any questions. It tells you who you are.”
The industry has largely resisted calls to remove loot boxes voluntarily. It now faces an impending threat of regulation in the UK and elsewhere after Belgium, the Netherlands and China either classified them as gambling or moved to restrict them. Sweden is currently investigating how to regulate them. The children’s commissioner for England joined an influential committee of MPs in September in calling for loot boxes to be considered gambling and for tighter regulation to protect young gamers, some of whom spend hundreds of pounds on loot boxes to advance in games and keep pace with the progress of their peers. Carolyn Harris, chair of the all-party parliamentary group on gambling-related harm in the last parliament, said the rise of loot boxes on video games was “shocking”. “They’re grooming children to normalise gambling activity by encouraging speculative transactions where you don’t know what you’re going to get,” she said. “They grow up thinking there’s nothing wrong with pressing buttons and spending money on something that’s not real. They don’t even think of it as gambling. But speaking to young adults, they’ve all brought loot boxes and have now graduated to becoming gamblers.” A brief published earlier this month by the law firm White & Case said: “Sponsors with portfolio companies in this space should analyse the extent of the portfolio’s reliance on loot boxes as a revenue stream and assess the viability of alternative income models.” Pressure for reform is also growing in the US after a senator proposed a ban and criticised video game companies for “preying on user addiction”. “Now that microtransactions are widely accepted as part of the gaming experience, the amount of money spent on virtual in-game items and loot boxes is only going to keep growing unless the US follows the lead of other countries and seriously considers whether loot boxes are a form of gambling,” said Ryan Morison, a lawyer specialising in digital entertainment. The Association for UK Interactive Entertainment, a trade body for the games industry, said millions of people across a range of platforms and devices enjoyed playing games “sensibly and safely”. A range of business models were used to provide players with a number of choices through either paying upfront for a game or playing for free and paying for content within games, it said. “The newer subscription models which are being launched, as well as innovations such as season passes, offer even more choice and control in how people access the entertainment content they want to enjoy.”
Star Wars video game fans have waited impatiently – for almost a decade – for a romp through their favourite galaxy in the best traditions of the action-adventure game. Out of mercy (for I, too, am a fanatic), I’ll cut to the chase: Star Wars Jedi: Fallen Order does indeed deliver on that. Hitting all the right notes – and not just with the fluttering woodwind and heavy brass of the John Williams-styled orchestra – Fallen Order is right on brand. It has the ancient ruins of mystical past civilisations seamlessly blended with the crashed hulks of light-speeding starships; the militaristic, sterile, black and red halls of the Empire, with rapidly sliding doors that open on to lush landscapes. Alien life lurks everywhere, some cutesy, some deadly. Each planet – but especially the freezing, windswept stone villages of Zeffo that are overrun by stormtroopers – could be a Star Wars movie set. And Cal Kestis is a model Jedi protagonist – a lonely, brooding apparent nobody in the armpit of the galaxy whose fate is suddenly redirected towards heroism. His cute droid companion, BD-1, clings on his back, chirps in robot speak and aids him with holographic maps and occasional wisdom. Perhaps he was the runt of the R2-D2 litter. And, of course, there are plenty of roll-your-eyes throwaway comedy lines – the tonic of the Star Wars saga. The game is set in an era Obi-Wan Kenobi called the “dark times”, years before Luke Skywalker brings a new hope to the galaxy. Most of the Jedi Order, which once acted as intergalactic peacekeepers, are either dead or in hiding. The nascent Empire thrives. A former Padawan child apprentice who never finished his training, Kestis lives a solitary life on the planet Bracca, scrapping starships for credits. But soon the Inquisitorius, a force-sensitive squad of professional Jedi hunters, track him down. In the opening scenes, Kestis flees before being saved by a former Jedi Master (and Fallen Order’s more complex character) Cere Junda. Together, helped by Greez, a four-armed alien pilot with a gambling addiction and a bounty on his head, they seek to rebuild the Jedi Order. Do these feel like storylines and characters you’ve seen before? That’s because Fallen Order is a concoction of everything Star Wars has produced so far. With so much expectation, few risks were taken. The game’s developer, Respawn Entertainment, worked closely with Disney-owned Lucasfilm, which keeps a tight leash on any Star Wars product. Not only does it scrupulously stick to the franchise’s motifs, but Fallen Order plays it safe on the gameplay side, too, bringing together some of the most successful features from other video games rather than forging its own path. Lightsaber combat is heavily influenced by the 2018 hit God of War, which broke new ground for making each axe fight feel weighty and dangerous, and Dark Souls, where every enemy is defeated in a different way. These influences are welcome: Kestis was never properly trained in the force, and his early trials are appropriately tough. Still, this is a game that will occasionally shudder on a PlayStation 4, which could do with a little extra hyperdrive fuel to run it. Or maybe Respawn needed another month or two for polish. At times, encounters feel unfair because Kestis is sluggish, and it’s hard to tell whether this is by design or a design fault. Levels are complex, multilayered and hard to navigate, with hidden rooms and shortcuts – a nod towards Tomb Raider, Uncharted and Metroidvania games. As Kestis’s journey progresses, he can unlock new areas, and I urge you to return to old planets as some key items, including “stims” that double your health, can only be picked up on reruns. When you’re in a tricky boss fight, you’ll be thankful. Whether you love Fallen Order may depend on your view of the most recent Star Wars films. If you’re a fan of the JJ Abrams-directed Force Awakens, a movie that lovingly and religiously captured the original George Lucas feel, then Fallen Order will light you up with the force that binds us all. For those who preferred Rian Johnson’s new take in The Last Jedi, a film that takes risks, breaks taboos and even questions the entire premise of the saga, then Fallen Order will feel a little too straightforward. In relaunching a much-loved and much-missed Star Wars genre, Fallen Order does exactly what it set out to. It reaches the bar, but then stops, with a set of characters and adventures that are not particularly intriguing or fresh, but certainly feel like they come from that very particularly galaxy, far, far away.
Pregnancy, birth and looking after your child put a huge strain on your body – Nintendo’s Ring Fit can help you reclaim it Shaping up … Nintendo’s Ring Fit Adventure. Shaping up … Nintendo’s Ring Fit Adventure. Photograph: Nintendo While celebrities and Instagram influencers seem able to shed their pregnancy weight within a few months (while cheerfully chronicling the process on an hourly basis) the reality is quite different for most women. I didn’t bounce back, I sort of crawled, and it’s hard not to feel at a loss when you’re so tired even looking at your trainers feels like work. Between the lack of sleep and having to recover from one of the most physically demanding experiences the human body can go through, just leaving the house is an achievement in itself, let alone exercising. While the NHS recommends waiting until after your six-week postnatal check before doing anything strenuous (longer if you’ve had a caesarean or complicated delivery), experts also recommend regular activity to keep you fit, help your body recover and possibly prevent postnatal depression. That’s all well and good, but being able to hit the gym when you’re trying to juggle childcare and everyday upkeep often feels unrealistic. It’s been almost a year since my daughter was born, and I still struggle to find time to do more than a brisk walk to the shops for more nappies to get my heart rate up. So when Nintendo released Ringcon for the Nintendo Switch in October, a unique game controller designed to get you exercising at home, it felt as if I’d found a potential solution. The first game to support the device, Ring Fit Adventure, features a range of traditional, guided exercises, mini-tasks and a story mode that sees you partner up with a talking ring to take on the dark influence of the insanely ripped dragon, Dragaux. The package includes a Ring-con – a resistance hoop for one controller to slide into – and a leg strap for the other. It works by using sensors within the controllers that help track your movements as you exercise. It’s a surprisingly sturdy piece of kit that genuinely feels like exercise equipment despite its unusual shape. However, at £65, it’s a pretty big investment and, if you don’t own a Nintendo Switch, you’ll need to factor that into the cost as well. While I had to find a safe spot far from baby’s reach to store the ring and leg strap, having it at home felt like a convenient way to fit in a workout without having to worry about the babycare logistics of going to the gym. You can set your fitness level to determine how hard the exercises are, though starting with the lower-impact casual settings is a good idea as your ligaments are still more flexible after birth so are at increased risk of injury if you stretch too much. It was enough to get my heart racing without being too far out of my comfort zone. Feeling a little silly about squatting while holding a hoop, I drew my curtains so that no one could see, but the in-game exercise guide is clear and reassuring, and that initial embarrassment faded quickly. The adventure mode sees you jogging through various areas and occasionally stopping to battle monsters by using various exercises such as knee lifts and chair pose to deal damage. The exercises feel like a mix between an aerobics and a pilates class, and, with the controllers tracking your movements and rumbling with each rep, you get a good amount of feedback to keep you on track. It feels way more effective than just following a video class online thanks to that guidance, and the gaming element made me feel as if I had achieved something even after a short session. There’s also the option to customise your workout or quickly access “sets” that focus on certain areas of your body. I found the back and shoulders sets particularly useful because I’ve been dealing with back pain – a common ailment after having a child. It hasn’t been a miracle cure, but it has eased after stretching these areas out. What has surprised me most about using the Ring Fit has been the mental benefits. I had gone into this hoping to find a more convenient way to shift some baby weight, so I wasn’t expecting to have a personal epiphany about my own body. No matter how many times you hear how wonderful growing a tiny human inside you is, it still feels totally surreal. The body you’ve known your whole life starts changing whether or not you want it to. It’s suddenly not just yours any more and that’s a huge thing to get your head around as your feet swell inexplicably and all of your ligaments soften to accommodate your expanding bump. Even after the baby arrives your body is not your own – it’s used for sustenance, sleeping on or as a mode of transportation as you dutifully carry them around. Squeezing in a 10-minute workout with the Ring Fit between nap times helped me feel as if I was finally reclaiming my body. It was moving in the ways that I willed it to rather than just responding to the needs of my child. After giving birth, my self-confidence and body image has taken a huge knock. Appearing at the gym or jogging in public feels unapproachable right now, but being able to have guided exercise within the privacy of my own home has given me a gentle kick to start getting fit in a more manageable way. Even if I don’t lose any weight on my adventures with Dragaux, reclaiming that sense of control over my own body has been invaluable.
It doesn’t take long for the guilt to set in. You’re holding a handgun in London’s Piccadilly Circus as terrorists run wild with assault rifles and flames bloom from a recently ignited suicide vest. As terrified civilians run past, screaming and wounded, you’re thinking: “Where is the next mission checkpoint?” Call of Duty is perhaps the most divisive mainstream gaming brand of all time; a gung-ho, partisan blockbuster combat romp selling us a vision of rough and ready spec-ops superstars travelling the globe with their guns and their competence, helping freedom fighters while killing rogue paramilitary groups, without pausing too long to consider the differences between them. In 2019’s Modern Warfare, a reimagining of Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare from 2007, you take control of SAS and CIA operatives as they aid rebel forces in the fictitious country of Urzikstan, which borders Russia and is fighting for its independence. A stash of chemical weapons has gone missing and must be located while an extremist Russian military faction is quelled. The story is a pulpy, mashup of real-world proxy wars and brutal localised conflicts that panders to US sensibilities. Urzikstan could be Syria, it could be Afghanistan, it could be the Ukraine or Chechnya. It doesn’t matter. What matters is that hard men and women are putting their lives on the line in hidden, deniable ops where the rules are bent – and that can include the odd war crime. The problem is, it’s fun and it’s really well made. Modern Warfare looks astonishing, from the almost photorealistic cinematic sequences to the intricately detailed in-game environments: the desert towns, the city streets, the remote villas. Sometimes you just have to stop and admire the orange glint of the sun off a burned-out vehicle. And this is the best campaign since Call of Duty 4. From an incredibly tense raid on a terrorist stronghold in north London to a bloody siege on an embassy roof, it is exciting and brilliantly paced. There are references to the series’ past, with particular moments – a helicopter raid during which you take control of missiles from the air; a long-range sniper mission – that will remind veterans of classic missions Death from Above and All Ghillied Up. There is always some new high-tech toy to try, or a fresh perspective on the battle in hand. All the while, you concede that this is a polished game made by a US studio, studying, and arguably excusing, American military and political methods. There has already been significant controversy surrounding the Highway of Death mission, which features the slaughter by Russian military of escaping civilians but bears a close resemblance to a real-life US-led action against retreating Iraqi military personnel in Kuwait in 1991, also later known as the Highway of Death. This switching of culprits has led to the game’s rating on review site Metacritic being bombed with negative comments from apparently Russian players. True, the game does try to muddy (or perhaps more accurately bloody) the waters of which side is good or bad, right or wrong. There are key Russian allies in the game who are crucial to your mission, and we’re encouraged to view the main antagonist, Russian general Roman Barkov, as a rogue player, disowned by his country. At the same time, we see western forces break the rules and commit ethical crimes which the player has to decide whether to be a part of. There is a lot of bluster about blurred lines and “fighting with gloves off”, but it just amounts to chatter in the wind before the next barnstorming set-piece. Meanwhile, in the multiplayer section of the game, where players fight one another in a range of team-based pursuits, some long-term fans have complained about the new maps, which are more naturalistic in design than previous Call of Duty online maps, which work like little purpose-built sports arenas of death. There are more places to camp and to snipe from, so players have to be more guarded, slowing the pace. Yet the ridiculously chaotic Ground War mode, which pits two teams of 32 players against each other on a large map with armoured vehicles and helicopters, is exhilarating if wildly unpredictable, while the more contained mode Gunfight has teams of two competing in very small areas with a range of weapons. This is tense, highly controlled multiplayer action – not quite up there with Counter-Strike for tactical purity but as close as Call of Duty is ever likely to get. Can we enjoy Call of Duty: Modern Warfare without being revolted by or sucked into its skewed, cliche-ridden interpretation of geopolitics and asymmetrical warfare? We have, after all, had many years of the Hollywood-military complex selling us smartly packaged, exciting thrillers such as Black Hawk Down, Hurt Locker and Act of Valor, all of which have been questioned for their depiction of US military actions. The Liam Neeson movie Taken is an awful analysis of human trafficking but an amazing mainstream thriller. Call of Duty Modern Warfare, meanwhile, is a slickly produced, well constructed military shooter filled with thrilling set-pieces and moments of fraught tension. It’s also a good run-and-gun online shooter, which wants to bring something fresh to the way online team-based competition works in this genre but isn’t quite there yet – new maps will inevitably follow. If you tire of the online action, there is always the campaign to replay at a higher difficulty level. A new “realism” mode takes the challenge up to max, removing all the on-screen information so you have to rely on memory and your senses to know if you’re about to run out of ammo or if a grenade has just rolled up alongside your cover point. This mode brings a whole new dimension of heart-in-the-mouth suspense, completely changing the pace and complexion of the action. Despite yourself, you are dragged into the fray again.
Nintendo Switch Professor E Gadd and new clone Gooigi are among the inventive innovations aiding Mario’s timid twin. A breath of life for the hunt-and-chase format Luigi’s Mansion 3. Luigi’s Mansion 3. Photograph: Nintendo Luigi never seems to learn his lesson. It’s been 18 years since he was first lured to a haunted house and tortured by its spooky inhabitants. Now, having been duped again, he’s trapped in an even bleaker building – the Hotel of Last Resort – as he races to rescue a familiar cast of Mushroom Kingdom characters. Although it treads very familiar ground to its predecessors, there’s a lot to love in the third instalment of the adventure series that lets Mario’s timid twin take charge. You still guide the character through uniquely themed sections of the building, relying on his flashlight and multi-functional Poltergust vacuum to rid the place of ghosts. Luigi keeps track of his progress through the 15 main hotel floors with the help of a digital assistant, amusingly called a Virtual Boo, as well as the quirky Professor E Gadd, who’s on hand to offer tips and tutorials. The game was never likely to stray too far from its roots as a hunt-and-chase adventure, but Nintendo has attempted to breathe new life into the format, and it’s these changes that truly elevate the game. The most innovative addition is Gooigi, a glowing gummy bear-like Luigi clone made of, well, goo. Previously appearing in the 3DS version of Luigi’s Mansion, his malleable nature allows Gooigi to squeeze through grates and pipes, helping to solve puzzles and reach previously inaccessible areas. The presence of Gooigi enhances the experience a great deal, especially when playing in co-op mode, where you partner up with a friend and explore different parts of a room at the same time. While many puzzles are straightforward, some don’t have obvious solutions, so being able to call on a second pair of eyes for clue-spotting is a welcome addition. The game’s painstakingly detailed levels, featuring themes ranging from ancient Egyptian to medieval to modern-day Hollywood, also have much more depth than its predecessors. Each level, including the one set in a sewer, has its own kind of serene beauty that invites you to explore every corner. Curiosity is readily rewarded with stacks of money and treasure. Much of it just lying around, but some is hidden away and requires you to experiment with your tools in suspicious spaces. Creative players will enjoy discovering ways to access the most hard-to-reach treasure. Your stash can later be traded for a small selection of items in a shop accessed via the Virtual Boo. As is traditional, an end-of-level boss awaits you after you have cleared each room. These battles with an eccentric array of ghouls and goblins can be slightly maddening due to the trial-and-error approach needed discover their hidden weak spot. If you’re really struggling, though, a few clues will occasionally appear on screen to help you out. The random equipment and characters you find scattered about the hotel can prove useful too, once you figure out the best way to use them; it’s deeply satisfying – and hilarious – to use a rescued Toad as a weapon, for example. One floor also requires the near-continuous use of a giant rubber duck to navigate the obstacle-strewn surroundings, which was by far one of the most enjoyable experiences I’ve had playing any Switch game. Multiplayer fans have two options to choose from (separate from the co-op mode). ScareScraper lets you play in a team of up to eight, online or locally, to complete missions such as collecting Toads or cash, or engage in further ghost busting activities. And ScreamPark offers up three Mario Party-style mini-games that work best with four or more players. It offers short bursts of frenzied fun but those looking for a longer, more immersive experience are likely to find ScareScraper the more entertaining of the two modes. Luigi’s Mansion 3 is a captivating and charming game, but it’s not without its flaws. If you follow the main storyline without breaking off to collect treasure, it can start to feel repetitive – a more substantial range of side quests less reliant on the Polturgust would have been welcome. And while it’s satisfying to be able to collect so much cash, the items you receive in exchange are underwhelming. In the later stages of the game, we deserve a sizeable new gadget or tool. However, like many of Nintendo’s best-loved franchises, Luigi’s Mansion 3 is imaginative, humorous and highly inventive. It may be nearly two decades old but the series continues to evolve in pleasing ways.
When DeepMind, Google’s AI research outfit, set out to demonstrate its latest breakthrough, it had to confront an added twist: how do you set your robot free to play games on the internet without anyone realising they’re competing against it? The company caused a stir when it announced that its AlphaGo AI had beaten a world-class player at the ancient Asian boardgame Go. A few months later, it beat the world number one player. But for the deeply strategic real-time war game StarCraft II, it had a different goal: to reach “grandmaster” standard – putting it in the top 200 players worldwide – on the game’s public servers, building its ranking the same way any human player would. That meant being matched with a steadily improving cadre of other human players, and winning against them consistently enough to be promoted into those lofty ranks. StarCraft may seem like an odd next step, for a team that has previously taken on chess and Go, but the game has some qualities that make it interesting to researchers. It’s real-time, with millions upon millions of possible actions each second, and a vastly more complex roster than the six pieces of chess. Most importantly, it features hidden information: for the first few minutes of the game, it’s impossible to even see what your opponent is doing, let alone work out what they’re planning. That means strategies have to be flexible enough to account for surprises, and need to incorporate mind-games as well: feints and ambushes are possible in a way they aren’t in chess. And, of course, there’s an advantage in a community where even the best players in the world can be found playing each other online, ranked according to a very public algorithm, with a ton of data flying around. Players were told the new AI, dubbed AlphaStar, would be online, and were given the option of opting-in to play it, but in order to ensure it achieved its rank fairly, it had to play its games anonymously, so that opponents didn’t spend more effort trying to trick it or break it than they did trying to win. “There was a bit of a meme where people started asking ‘are you AlphaStar’ to others,” said DeepMind’s David Silver, one of the company’s co-founders and a lead author on the Nature paper announcing the StarCraft II victory, with a laugh. “We had the policy to just not chat – other than wishing people good luck, and then ‘good game’ at the end.” Staying silent during the game is not uncommon. But the need to remain anonymous did also turn the experience from a test of raw skill into a sort of “Turing test for video games”, said Silver’s colleague Oriol Vinyals. “AlphaStar needed to play like a good human, not like a superhuman.” That meant taking a different approach from previous StarCraft AIs, which tended to lean on the abilities that only a computer could have. In a game where human competitors track their “actions per minute”, for instance – how many times they use their mouse or keyboard – a professional-level player may hit three or four hundred, while some AIs were acting thousands or tens of thousands of times over a sixty second period. At other times, AIs were given near omniscience, with all the information available over the entire map plugged into their systems at once. “We really wanted to have an interface that we believe was reasonable from a capability standpoint,” says Vinyals. “So we added this notion of a camera view, which is very crucial for players to control where in the map they’re actually focusing on, and we also reduced the peak actions per minute, to 22 actions in a span of five seconds.” In other words, the AI is forced to play much more like a human, only being able to have a portion of the game world “on screen” at any one time, and clicking a reasonably limited amount of times. All of which is moot if the AI gives itself away by, well, playing like a robot. Luckily, it doesn’t – quite. In the first series of matches played publicly, in January, AlphaStar did exhibit one slightly mechanistic behaviour, falling prey to an almost cartoonish tactic where its opponent, the human player MaNa, moved a unit into and out of its field of view, changing its behaviour each time. Picture Winnie the Pooh following his own footsteps in the snow, and you’d get an idea of what the approach looked like. Hardly elegant, but it worked for MaNa to eke out the only win the humans scored over those first 11 matches. More interestingly, the AI – which was initially trained through imitation learning, watching how human players performed to learn the basics of the game – did develop its own understanding of the best tactical play, occasionally differing from the generally accepted practice among pros. The intricacies are a bit specialist (Playing as Protoss, for instance, AlphaStar moved its probes to a second nexus earlier in the game than was seen as efficient), but reinforce the idea that simply teaching an AI to perform a task to human level can improve our understanding of the work itself. “AlphaStar has been an amazing experience,” Oriol says. “Not because we beat most humans – I mean, we’ve beaten 99.8%, let’s not forget the 0.2% that are quite incredible. But it’s more like that we were able to see what some limitations might be, to inspire research that will come, you know, hopefully in the next few months or years and decades. Picking harder and harder problems and trying to be very good at them has been clearly the way so far.”
An artificial intelligence (AI) system has reached the highest rank of StarCraft II, the fiendishly complex and wildly popular computer game, in a landmark achievement for the field. DeepMind’s AlphaStar outperformed 99.8% of registered human players to attain grandmaster level at the game, which sees opponents build civilisations and battle their inventive, warmongering alien neighbours. The AI system mastered the game after 44 days of training, which involved learning from recordings of the best human players and then going up against itself and versions of the programme that intentionally tested its weaknesses. “AlphaStar has become the first AI system to reach the top tier of human performance in any professionally played e-sport on the full unrestricted game under professionally approved conditions,” said David Silver, a researcher at DeepMind. More than $31m in prize money has been handed out from thousands of StarCraft II e-sport tournaments since the game was released in 2010. Players start with a small number of worker units that can gather resources, construct buildings, develop new units and technologies, and embark on scouting missions to gain intelligence on opponents. Top players need adaptable short and long-term strategies to grow and defend their bases while laying waste to the opposition. To complicate matters, players cannot see the whole “map” of the game, so decisions are made on partial information. “Ever since computers cracked Go, chess and poker, the game of StarCraft has emerged, essentially by consensus from the community, as the next grand challenge for AI,” Silver said. “It’s considered to be the game which is most at the limit of human capabilities.” DeepMind created AlphaStar “agents” that play as each of the races in the game, namely Protoss, Terran and Zerg. Each race has different capabilities and technologies which favour distinct defensive and offensive strategies. AlphaStar first learned the basics from watching top human players. Then it entered the “AlphaStar league” where it played not only itself, but “exploiter” agents, which are versions of the AI that specifically targeted AlphaStar’s weak points. The training ensured that AlphaStar became a formidable opponent against all three races and every strategy. The DeepMind team restricted AlphaStar’s capabilities, ensuring for example that it could not perform moves at superhuman speeds. This proved crucial to the AI’s success, because instead of beating humans through speed alone, it was forced to learn winning long-term strategies. Oriol Vinyals, the lead researcher on the project, said AIs like AlphaStar could potentially be used to improve personal assistants, self-driving cars, weather predictions and climate models. The work was published in the scientific journal Nature. Dan Klein, a professor of computer science at the University of California at Berkeley, who was not involved in the work, said it was an exciting achievement driven by key advances. “What’s great about StarCraft as a testbed for AI is that all its complexities happen at once,” he said. While DeepMind states that it will never be involved in military work, and Starcraft II is not a realistic war simulation, the results will be of interest to the military, said Noel Sharkey, emeritus professor of AI and robotics at the University of Sheffield. In March, a US government report described how AI enriched battlefield simulations and allowed wargamers to assess the potential outcomes of different tactics. “Military analysts will certainly be eyeing the successful AlphaStar real-time strategies as a clear example of the advantages of AI for battlefield planning. But this is an extremely dangerous idea with the potential for humanitarian disaster. AlphaStar learns strategy from big data in one particular environment. The data from conflicts such as Syria and Yemen would be too sparse to be of use,” said Sharkey. “And as DeepMind explained at a recent United Nations event, such methods would be highly dangerous for weapons control as the moves are unpredictable and can be creative in unexpected ways. This is against the laws that govern armed conflict.”
The children’s commissioner for England has called for tighter legislation to protect young online gamers, some of whom are spending hundreds of pounds on “loot boxes” to keep up with friends and advance in games. Anne Longfield wants ministers to amend current law so that loot boxes in games such as Fifa are classified as gambling. She also wants a maximum daily spending limit to be introduced for children to curb excessive in-game spending. Loot boxes allow players to spend real money to unlock additional characters or equipment which will help them progress. They are seen by many as gambling because players have no idea what they are buying, so they are like a lucky dip and players can end up chasing their losses. The commissioner’s report, Gaming the System, also reveals that some children fear they are addicted to gaming and do not feel in control of the amount of time they spend playing. One 16-year-old told researchers: “You don’t realise how long you’re actually playing for … sometimes it’s five or six hours.” More than nine out of 10 children (93%) play video games in the UK. The report found that younger children, aged 10 and 11, spend two to three hours a day playing online games including Fortnite, Roblox, Minecraft, Mario Kart and Skylanders, mainly after school and on the weekends. Older children, aged 15 and 16, spend one to three hours a day playing Rainbow Six Siege, the Fifa football series, Call of Duty and Grand Theft Auto online, balancing this with revision and homework. Some children said they were worried loot boxes were a form of gambling. Those playing Fifa, for example, said they realised the chances of finding a good football player in a mystery pack were very low, but they still spent money in the hope of adding to their squad. “I never get anything out of it [buying packs] but I still do it,” said one 14-year-old Fifa player. The commissioner acknowledged that playing games online could be rewarding and could help develop strategic skills and friendships, but warned that young players were open to exploitation by games companies playing on their need to keep up with friends by encouraging them to spend on loot boxes. “Children have told us they worry they are gambling when they buy loot boxes, and it’s clear some children are spending hundreds of pounds chasing their losses,” said Longfield. “I want the government to classify loot boxes in games like Fifa as a form of gambling. A maximum daily spend limit for children would also be reassuring for parents and children themselves.” The commissioner wants financial harm to be brought within the scope of the government’s forthcoming online harms legislation. She says the government should take immediate action to amend the definition of gaming in section 6 of the Gambling Act 2005 to regulate loot boxes as gambling. In addition, she says games that are distributed online should be subject to a legally enforceable age-rating system, just as physical games are, with additional warnings displayed for games which facilitate in-game spending. MPs on the digital, culture, media and sport committee in the House of Commons have previously recommended that loot boxes should be regulated as gambling and children barred from purchasing them in their report on immersive and addictive technologies. Earlier this month, the NHS announced the opening of the country’s first specialist clinic to treat children and young adults addicted to playing video games. Responding to the commissioner’s report, a government spokesperson said: “Video games can be enjoyed by children safely as part of a healthy lifestyle and we encourage parents to use built-in controls to set spending and time limits. “But we are clear children must always be protected from harm and we will carefully consider the concerns raised in this report in relation to excessive or gambling-like behaviour.” The video games industry trade body UK Interactive Entertainment (Ukie) said the commissioner’s report reflected a lot of the positive experiences from online games which bring children together, encourage creativity and equip them with important skills for a digital age. “We recognise the need to educate players, parents and carers about safe and sensible play habits and for the industry to take an appropriate role in doing so,” said Ukie chief executive Jo Twist. “This is why we already work hard to proactively tackle the challenges highlighted in the report directly. “The industry continues to promote healthy and balanced playing practices through our consumer information site askaboutgames.com and via lesson plans available for schools through Ukie’s Digital Schoolhouse initiative.”
Valve says it has halted trading of some in-game items in multiplayer shooter Counter-Strike: Global Offensive Counter-Strike: Global Offensive has previously faced criticism for enabling gambling by children. Photograph: Valve The gaming firm Valve has halted trading of some in-game items in its popular multiplayer shooter Counter-Strike: Global Offensive after discovering that “nearly all” of the trading was part of a money-laundering scheme run by “worldwide fraud networks”. In CS:GO, players can earn containers with cosmetic items, which can be unlocked using keys bought either in-game or for real money from other players. Valve said it had closed the market between players, and in patch notes for the latest version of CS:GO – first reported by Motherboard – it gave its reasons. “In the past, most key trades we observed were between legitimate customers. However, worldwide fraud networks have recently shifted to using CS:GO keys to liquidate their gains,” it said. “At this point, nearly all key purchases that end up being traded or sold on the marketplace are believed to be fraud-sourced. As a result we have decided that newly purchased keys will not be tradeable or marketable.” Valve did not go into detail, but it is likely the trading was used to launder income from credit card fraud and other financial crimes. Buying and reselling digital goods is a popular way for financial criminals to cash out from identity theft. In the past, iTunes and Amazon gift cards have also been popular. Counter-Strike has previously faced criticism from regulators for enabling gambling by children. In July the Gambling Commission’s programme director, Brad Enright, told MPs that CS:GO was responsible for more enquiries than any other game. “We’ve had dialogue with Valve Corporation,” Enright said. “Where we draw their attention to particular games where British consumers including children are gambling on those sites, they have closed them down. “We’ve said that’s not a sustainable approach. They’ve created this situation … and there’s an onus and responsibility on them to address the byproduct of how they’re operating.” 
Eímear Noone got into composing and conducting video game music by accident. One day, while studying music at Trinity College Dublin, a fourth-year student came to the bar she was drinking in with members of the college chapel choir and offered them a few quid to help with the orchestration on a project of his. “I have a vivid memory of sitting on a studio floor somewhere in Dublin writing choral parts with my pals and then singing them,” she says. “Six months later, my brother calls me in a complete tizzy and says, ‘Did you work on Metal Gear Solid?’ I was like, ‘No!’ He says, ‘Well, I’m looking at your name on the screen credits right now.’” And sure enough, the session she had contributed to for beer money was the soundtrack to Hideo Kojima’s blockbuster adventure game. “Years later, I was at the Bird’s Nest in Beijing conducting this very piece of music,” she says. “It’s just a bizarre life.” Noone is now a successful composer for films and video games, having contributed scores for directors such as Gus Van Sant and Joe Dante, and for games such as World of Warcraft, Diablo III and Hearthstone. In November, she will present her second series of High Score, Classic FM’s programme dedicated to game music. Underappreciated outside of game fandom for years, the genre now has dedicated orchestras playing sold-out concert tours around the world. And Noone is a passionate advocate to explore and explain the unique elements of the form. There is, naturally, a foundational similarity between game and film scores: they are both composed to accompany and accentuate screened action. But while a film score needs to accompany a two-hour linear experience with specific cues and events, video game music must be present for many hours of play. Most open-world action adventures, such as Assassin’s Creed Origins, Witcher 3 and Final Fantasy XV, offer more than 100 hours of narrative, but many players will spend much longer exploring their worlds. Music has two roles in games: it accompanies the noninteractive cinematic sequences that set up the story and occur throughout a game (sort of like short animated movie sequences) and they provide background music while you play. “Cinematics are scored very similarly to a movie or an animated film,” says Noone. “The composer will be given an animatic, which could be anything from a fully rendered sequence to just stick figures on screen. But the edit is pretty close to what it’ll be in the end. “But when music needs to respond to changes the player makes in the world, we employ a kind of loop system. We use a recording method known as striping – we might record the strings separately, for example, but we’ll compose in a way that the strings on their own provide a functioning piece of music. Then, if our character triggers something in the world, perhaps a battle, we can land the wood winds or brass on top of that to increase the intensity. Each part must be self-contained yet work with others – you need to be able to kick in the brass, kick in the percussion, whenever it’s triggered by gameplay. It’s like a Rubik’s cube puzzle! This is the kind of thing Mozart would have enjoyed – he loved puzzles. Mozart would have loved making game music.” Noone also points out that video game scores help establish the reality of the world the player is about to explore: the instruments used, the style of music, the pace and tempo all work with the art and design to give the players clues about how the universe functions. “The composer has to put you in the headspace of the world, emotionally and intellectually,” she says. “Often these are fantasy worlds, but to ensure they make sense they must have their own rules – and the composer must abide by them. I had a fan contact me once who said ‘I was just listening to the score of World of Warcraft and there are electric guitars! There are no electric guitars in Azeroth!’ But these rules are important – they help make an authentic fantasy world.” For Noone, the most satisfying part is composing the themes that accompany the player throughout the interactive experience. “In-game music is where the composer gets the most freedom – it’s where we creates the big themes,. This is where a lot of the music we perform live with orchestras comes from; it’s the big identifiable themes that players associated with the game and with the characters. “Take the music of Koji Kondo – as soon as you hear the theme from Legend of Zelda, you’re right back in the game, you’re back in the time period in your life that you played it and you’re back with the people you played it with. It’s like hearing a great pop song playing over and over again on the radio – it encapsulates that time for you, it’s in bars, it’s in shops … and with video game music, you live with that soundtrack for the entire time you’re playing the game. It’s not two hours, it’s however long you spend in that game, which can be years. “Game soundtracks become the soundtracks to people’s childhoods, the soundtracks to their second childhoods and their children’s childhoods! More people are listening to orchestral music through video games than ever before in the history of recorded music.” Noone moves on to another difference between film and video game music: they follow different trends. “In film, there’s a stylistic trend at the moment away from the big theme,” she says. “Directors talk a lot about texture. But it seems that video game directors still embrace the big theme, and that’s good for composers because we want to write something more involving.” She is passionate and defensive about game music and its merits. I ask her if the medium, with its lush symphonic orchestration, is kind of old-fashioned – if you compare it to where modern instrumental music is going? I bring up Elgar and his use of big sweeping themes as an example of where game music seems to be and she smiles broadly. “Actually, this is a really good example because when Elgar was writing that music it would have been really uncool – it’s very emotional, it’s visual but at the time there was a lot of atonal music, things were changing, going into serialism even – and Elgar was writing these big lush emotional tunes – how dare he?!” So it’s quite radical for video game music to be overtly lush and emotional? “This is the music of the 21st century,” she says. “Look, we do have atonal music in video games – listen to Garry Schyman’s BioShock score, for instance. I just sat on a panel with Krzysztof Penderecki and his influence is all over horror games. It’s all about the context. There’s a gorgeous mobile game Contre Jour – it’s very visually different, and the piano score is reminiscent of the score to Amélie. I hear the influence of Glass or Reich in lots of what you might consider more traditional classically influenced scores – especially Steve Reich’s Proverb, the vocals on that. Ethereal vocals are definitely part of the video game music style.” For the next season of High Score, Noone has lined up some themed features dealing with specific elements of game music. One show is all about Japanese soundtracks, from the seminal work of Nobuo Uematsu and Yoko Shimomura, who operate in the western orchestral tradition, to J-pop-inspired Masato Nakamura, composer for Sonic the Hedgehog, who is part of the band, Dreams Come True. She also has a programme dedicated to nostalgia, looking back at the earliest works of composers such as Nintendo’s Koji Kondo, who started out on arcade games in the mid-1980s. Before the arrival of CD-Rom technology in the early 1990s, game soundtracks had to be programmed directly to sound chips, with only a very limited amount of memory available. Noone thinks this process was vital in forming the unique sound of game scores. “The reason some of these themes endure, especially Koji Kondo’s, is he had to sit down and painstakingly programme the themes in note by note – so every note mattered – he had to really seriously plan it. If you look at Beethoven’s manuscripts you’ll see him start with a complex theme and then cut that back and he ends up with the opening of the fifth symphony. Similarly, Koji had to refine and chisel down – and that’s why the themes from Mario and Zelda endure: they had to be simple but effective and meaningful.” Noone’s programmes then are going to be an interesting listen for game and music fans who want to understand why scores sound the way they do – and she can be amusingly honest about how game scores (just like film scores) have tropes and techniques that composers will rely on again and again. “If I’m going to be really simplistic, we all know instantly that when the chord of C major goes to F sharp major then back to C major, there’s a spaceship about to fly over head,” she laughs. “Flat five one or sharp four one is a spaceship flying over. That’s it. Every time.” • Eímear Noone presents the new series of High Score from 9 November at 9-10pm on Classic FM.
A while ago, I wrote a column about the division in my family that Fortnite was creating, with my kids playing it nonstop and then allowing me to play before confirming that I was, as I feared, a “noob” (translation: someone without skill in the area of gaming). This was distressing, as I have always considered myself a gamer. Admittedly I became slightly disenfranchised when online gaming emerged, which allows you to play anyone from anywhere, as, for me, the whole point of gaming is escapism. And escapism, to my mind, is not being repeatedly beaten at a game by an 11-year-old from Ohio while he calls me a “little bitch”. Before all that, though, I was an addict. At my sons’ age, I was locked into my Amiga 500. I used to play Batman, the New Zealand Story, Rainbow Islands, Speedball. I remember playing Wonderboy and getting to the very last level, after hundreds of attempts, before my younger brother, in an effort to help, accidentally pressed a key that exited the game, burst into tears and ran away. I felt so bad for him. I also loved him slightly less after that. I remember becoming so entranced by Super Mario World on the Nintendo 64 that I sat down to play it at 5pm in my student accommodation and stayed there until I had finished the game at 8am the following morning. This shows you both how much I loved gaming, and also how truly pathetic my university social life was. But that’s for another time. My gaming past means I feel the disconnect with my children all the more keenly. I end up saying things such as, “I used to game, you know, and in my day they were proper games, not all this claptrap”, and they look at me like some sort of ancient artefact they have no interest in. And then they carry on playing Fortnite. Don’t get me wrong: we have had some fun times gaming together. We play each other at Mario Kart, and I even invested in loads of Nintendo Labo kits, where you build cardboard tools with which to play the games. What this has mainly involved is the kids watching me trying to put something together repeatedly, before losing my temper and my wife asking the kids to “leave Daddy to calm down for a bit”. When my Fortnite column was published, the noted egamer Frankie Ward got in touch on Twitter and offered to give me some training. This felt like a dream come true: I could become good at Fortnite, win the respect of my kids, and then use that respect to turn them against their mother somehow. I contacted Frankie, but she was on her way to an etournament in Sweden, so she arranged for esports commentator Daniel Falcone (yes, that’s a thing, and a lucrative one) to come to Crawley and help us out. I thought it would be fun to get all the family involved. I asked my wife, and she immediately said no. She is happy to game with the kids, but as soon as she heard there might be a photo in the Guardian, she made it very clear that she was out. My mother, on the other hand, was keen as mustard before I had even explained what we were going to do. This implies that she was desperate to get into the paper, but the truth is, my mum is perpetually frustrated at how little she sees us; this was more of an opportunity to spend some time with the grandkids. It also occurred to me that my mum being able to play Fortnite might be the best thing ever for her relationship with the boys. They currently see her as the loud woman who kisses them way too much when she turns up at their house. Most of their time with her is spent doing that cartoon-eyeballs-popping-out thing while my mum hugs the life out of them. It might be beneficial for them to see her as a Fortnite player. Additionally, it would be nice for me to have somebody present whom I can definitely beat. My mum saw my brother and me grow up with computer games, and has always been bemused by how much we love them. Occasionally, she has expressed distaste for what’s being played (she finds beat-’em-ups to be a damning indictment of human nature), so I wondered how she was going to take to a game that required you to drop on to an island and kill absolutely everybody else there until you are the last person standing, in what many have dubbed the “post-Brexit simulator”. The day of the training arrives. Daniel has set up three screens, and the boys start playing immediately, admiring the “skins” Daniel has chosen (this is your onscreen avatar, which could be anything from a robot sentinel to a skirting-pretty-close-to-licensing laws version of Chief Hopper from Stranger Things). While the boys play, Mum and I receive our basic training before preparing to fight it out as a family. Mum goes first. Daniel begins by setting us up in an empty, onscreen environment so we can familiarise ourselves with the game. As well as running around and picking up weapons, we have to look out for rejuvenating potions; we can also build things to hide behind, which is apparently the skill that distinguishes the really great players. I understand that games are not rooted in reality, but the idea that you would knock up a fence while being shot at feels like something you wouldn’t even suggest at a development meeting, let alone allow as a big part of the game. Having said that, my son is playing as a banana, so I might be judging this by the wrong criteria. Daniel watches Mum for a little bit and then adjusts his tasks accordingly. Instead of showing us how to use various weapons and execute some cool kills, he very quickly ascertains that he is going to have to scaffold the learning a bit. He asks my mum to try something simple – walking into a house. That takes half an hour. You use the right-hand stick to control where you are looking, and the left-hand stick to control where you are walking. Mum spends most of that half an hour walking into a wall while looking up at the sky. I start telling her what to do, and she asks me how come I am already so good at this; I realise that her problem is that she has no experience of gaming at all. By dint of simply having played a game, any game, I am able to move around with no problem. It is both a relief to know she is that crap, and incredibly frustrating to watch. I keep saying things such as, “Oh my God, Mum, are you serious?” as she once again fails to walk through a door. Again and again she imprisons herself in a room, completely unable to leave, putting me and the boys into hysterics. But then the boys do something wonderful. With Daniel’s help, they realise that they are going to have to help their grandmother pick up the basics. So they join the game and start leaving various weapons and potions around where she is playing, giving her little tests in how to pick things up and access them. They talk her through what to do, and congratulate her when she manages it. She is loving it. They start positioning themselves in places and asking her to try to shoot them. They don’t even mind when she asks them to get closer and then, as she tries to shoot, looks up at the sky hundreds of times. I am actually impressed. Then it is my turn for training, and I have to confess that here I am slightly envious of my mum. While Daniel is brilliant, my mum’s inexperience means that absolutely everything she does leads to a family celebration: shoot someone, applause! Walk out of a room, applause! Manage to spend 30 seconds without looking up at the sky, applause! While the boys remain supportive, I receive no accolades for my efforts; they already expect me to be a certain standard. I am beginning to regret bringing Mum. This woman will be declared a champion simply for managing to walk out of a room. Daniel explains that I am justified in finding Fortnite hard. It is a notoriously difficult game to get to grips with, particularly because you have to start playing against other online players, who are already brilliant at it. Your early experiences are mainly getting killed almost immediately, and then waiting for another game to start. It’s a hurdle that Fortnite’s makers have addressed, somewhat controversially, by introducing game-controlled bots, which aren’t as good as real-life players. The idea is that you can practise against those, rather than be murdered by a group of kids who have spent 10 hours a day playing from their mum’s basement for the last six months. (The other thing Fortnite’s makers did, last weekend, was replace the whole game with a black hole, before unveiling Chapter 2 and a rebooted world two days later. Which means we might need to train all over again.) Our family session completed, the tournament begins. The idea is simple: whoever first completes a kill will be declared the winner. Daniel has set up a “rumble”, so that if you are killed you will simply reappear and keep going, with that death going against your team’s score. It is my eldest son, Theo, v Mum v me. Theo immediately bags himself a kill and is declared victorious, but Mum and I play on out of sheer pride. I have everything on the line here; a defeat will be unrecoverable in terms of gaining any kind of respect. I will have no choice but to offer the kids the opportunity to request a new father, one who can assemble Nintendo Labo structures, and move on to a new life. Fortunately, the online players of Fortnite prove my saviours. They are all very good, so it quickly becomes obvious that neither Mum nor I is going to have any chance of killing them. Every time either of us approach anything like a scrap, we are dispatched immediately. One particular player identifies me as a weak link and keeps seeking me out to kill me again. This is not my proudest moment. Daniel says he is willing to wait in the studio until one of us gets a kill, but it feels slightly unfair to keep him here for a month. So Theo is declared the winner, and Mum and I hug as worthy losers, before she is once again applauded for having given it a go. Has my training turned me into the expert I hoped I could be? Certainly not. But it has given us some quality family time, the sort I might previously have assumed was possible only through the medium of board games or days out. The boys enjoyed teaching us about “their” game. And I have been reminded of how hilarious it is when your parents are irretrievably rubbish at something. We have all agreed to have another go sometime. As long as there are no photographers involved, my wife might even join us.
PC/Mac; Denki, Curve Digital There’s plenty to do in this exciting and empowering simulation game, where automation is the key to your shining future Help is in the script … Autonauts Help is in the script … Autonauts. Photograph: Curve Digital You’ll know that Autonauts has taken over your thinking when you first reach for a real pen and paper while playing. For the many genres this intriguing game capably spans, interacting with it is really about keeping up with a spiralling to-do list. And at some point that list will exceed the capacity of your brain and spill over on to the closest paper to hand. To lose yourself to Autonauts is to find notes like “reprogram plank-sorting robots!” scrawled on the backs of envelopes scattered around your computer. Autonauts is a game about colonising new worlds; landing alone on an unspoiled planet, your task is to build a thriving civilisation. There’s a little of the DNA of genre classics such as SimCity in there, but Autonauts busies you relentlessly with the fine detail of constructing a new settlement. Every individual plank must be hand-cut from logs, every tool assembled from scavenged materials, and every new structure must have its component elements delivered on foot before building work can begin. And there’s only one of you. Easing the task of turning a patch of land into a bustling colony is automation. The most important things you build in Autonauts are helper robots, each of which can be assigned to different tasks – a process that involves programming them using a real, functioning coding language. But don’t worry, you don’t have to be proficient in Basic or C to get going – the game teaches you everything as you go, and it is the coding and automation that makes Autonauts something special. If you find yourself repeating a job too often – perhaps chopping down trees – then a robot can be programmed to do it for you. Using a basic visual programming language, you can create scripts to guide a robot’s behaviour, all without typing a line of code. Instead, you teach the robots by asking them to observe how you approach a task. That generates a script made of different coloured blocks, each representing a command like “pick up”, “move to” or “use”. That script can then be edited to tweak a robot’s function. Adding a “repeat” block, for example, loops a given task over and over. Hit a play button, and the robot sets off to work. Fundamentally, it works somewhat like real game development tools. You could reasonably describe Autonauts as a busywork simulator combined with a coding tool, but that misrepresents just how fun – and rewarding – it is to play. It absolutely delivers the satisfying sense of establishing your unique outpost, and seeing a functioning rural hub emerge from the earth is entirely captivating. This pleasure ramps up when you start to feel a sense of what it is to be creative with coding. Building robots in Autonauts isn’t quick, and it needs to be done often. The instance in which you think to program a robot to build robots for you is a striking moment. Everything you can do in-game can be automated, and near-tangible shift in your thinking comes as you conceive ever more clever ways to automate complex tasks. And that is Autonauts’ greatest achievement. It opens something in you that makes you think like a creative coder, using automation to solve puzzles of efficiency. There are times you may feel a little lost when a dollop of guidance would be perfect. The playfield can get so busy with activity it can be hard to see why a robot isn’t performing as instructed. The soundscape could be more diverse. A scattering of additional narrative beats might bring a shade more context and energy to the toil. But, while wildly ornate, Autonauts is in equal parts playful, welcoming and charming. It is comparable to the cute farming sim Stardew Valley, yet it is very much its own game. And in the taste it gives you of thinking like a creative coder, it is in its own quiet way empowering and exciting.