The Wolfe Tones’ version of a 1920s Irish rebel song briefly knocked Stormzy and Dua Lipa off their familiar iTunes perches The Wolfe Tones. Traditional Dublin folk band the Wolfe Tones In the streaming age, the first singles charts of the new year are reliably predictable. Out goes the Christmas music; back in flood the familiar faces of Lewis Capaldi, Stormzy and Dua Lipa. But for a few hours on 8 January, an Irish rebel song about defying a notorious, 10,000-strong temporary police force sent by Churchill to Ireland in 1920 topped the UK iTunes chart. “Tell them how the IRA made you run like hell away,” runs the refrain of Come Out Ye Black and Tans, this version recorded by traditional Dublin folk band the Wolfe Tones, “From the green and lovely lanes of Killashandra.” Its wildcard success has as much to do with Alan Partridge and a ham advert as it does the legacy of Irish police brutality. Widely believed to have been written by the Irish writer and songwriter, Dominic Behan, as a tribute to his father, Stephen, the song denounces the British force of mostly former soldiers recruited to the Royal Irish Constabulary (RIC) in Ireland following the 1916 Easter Rising. Not exactly smitten by the British answer to the revolution – namely further repression – the author’s intention would later resonate with the Wolfe Tones. Since 1963, they have packed venues across the world with their siren song of national autonomy, exemplified by the sentiment of Come Out Ye Black and Tans. How has a song ostensibly rooted in Irish republicanism – a heady tale that is essentially an anti-colonialist anthem at its core – burrowed into the imagination of so many listeners? While it has, ahem, occupied a certain place in the minds of Irish people regardless of creed for decades, the broader phenomenon can (perhaps best disregarding a reworking for an Irish ham advert last year) be traced back to two disparate happenings. Last March, Steve Coogan ended an episode of This Time With Alan Partridge by singing the rebel song in character as eccentric rural Irish farmer and Partridge impersonator Martin Brennan. Irish Twitter went wild and the Wolfe Tones’ rendition of the song started to penetrate foreign consciousness on easily the biggest scale since Behan apparently put pen to paper. Then, last week, an event organised by the Irish government that was poised to commemorate the role of the RIC and Dublin Metropolitan Police (DMP) – two forces that acquired a reputation for brutality against civilians in the aftermath of IRA attacks during the Irish War of Independence – was deferred following kickback from the public and politicians. No doubt bolstered by fond memories of Martin Brennan, Come Out Ye Black and Tans not only briefly topped both the UK and Irish iTunes charts, but entered the Australian iTunes Top 5. The meme doubled as a signal to Irish Taoiseach Leo Varadkar and co. Admittedly, the iTunes charts are very reactive and easily swayed, and rarely reflect the Official Charts Company’s weekly rankings. (There was a brief furore around Jarvis Cocker’s Running the World hitting the UK iTunes chart top spot before Christmas, only to miss out on the festive Top 40 altogether.) But the song’s unlikely moment in the spotlight reflects the newfound prominence of many Irish voices and communities online. Late last year, the punmanteau “tansplaining” got a delightful debut outing in the New York Times (defined as “the phenomenon in which Irish people suffer inept lessons in their own history from British people”). The Wolfe Tones’ minor success signifies a broader trend of razor-sharp in-joking and commentary from Irish Twitter, both diaspora and those at home. The song looks beyond Ireland, too, succinctly relating the Irish experience to other peoples’ historic struggles against the British Empire: “Come tell us how you slew them poor Arabs two by two / Like the Zulus they had spears and bows and arrows.” The broader essence of the song hits home. Some concrete good has stemmed from it all, too. Founding Wolfe Tones member Brian Warfield has said that proceeds from the track will benefit wildlife and firefighter charities in Australia, and a leading Irish homelessness charity. Inevitably, Come Out Ye Black and Tans didn’t trouble this week’s official Top 40. Still, its day in the sun has given a song about the patently divisive legacy of the Black and Tans an honourable revitalisation – and brought historic intrigue and characteristic upset to the lamentably stagnant charts.
‘It’s portrayed as a romantic song but it’s actually a bit creepy. It’s about a guy – me – stalking someone else’s girlfriend while high’ ‘It was such a big hit, it scared me’ … James Blunt. ‘It was such a big hit, it scared me’ … James Blunt. Photograph: Giuseppe Cacace/Getty Images James Blunt, singer-songwriter I’d been telling my mates that I was going to be a professional musician since I was 14. When I was a captain in the British army in Kosovo, I had a guitar strapped to my tank. After I left the military, I did some demos for EMI and outside afterwards I lost my balance on my motorbike and smashed the guitar that had survived a war zone. Everyone was laughing. Needless to say, I didn’t get signed by EMI. One day I was on the underground in London and saw an ex-girlfriend with her new boyfriend. Our eyes met, but we just walked past each other, and I went home and wrote the words to You’re Beautiful in two minutes. I went to see my songwriter friend Sacha Skarbek in Los Angeles, and, with Amanda Ghost as a co-writer, we finished the song. It’s always been portrayed as romantic, but it’s actually a bit creepy. It’s about a guy (me) who’s high and stalking someone else’s girlfriend on the subway. But everyone has those moments where you wonder: “What if I’d said something?” I played it on the 25th floor of a hotel at the South by Southwest festival in Texas. Linda Perry [the singer, songwriter and record producer] was there and said she wanted to sign me to her new label. The label asked me to remove the words “fucking high” from You’re Beautiful. I tried “particularly high”, “especially high”! Eventually I sang “flying high” on the radio edit but wanted the released version left as it was. I told them: “I was fucking high!” The song has a false start. I sing “my life is brilliant” twice, which is my little joke, but I think in my elated state, from whatever concoction I might have taken at the time, life did seem really brilliant. The tube certainly looked very colourful. For the video I agreed to jump off a cliff in Mallorca. By the time I got there, I realised I’d made a terrible mistake but it was too late to back out. They had divers in the water in case I knocked myself unconscious. I had to jump twice because the first take wasn’t right, and I ended up with a split lip. It hurt, but it made a great video. I had no idea the song would be such a big hit, and it scared me at first. I thought I’d just be a musician putting out music. The song [released in 2004] became so ubiquitous that it started to irritate people, but I’m still proud of it and I love my job. I sang it at Elton John and David Furnish’s civil ceremony and I’m about to start my sixth world tour. Without You’re Beautiful, it’d be a tour of north London. Tom Rothrock, producer I watched South by Southwest on the internet and saw James. He sounded pretty interesting, but then I promptly forgot all about him. A few days later I heard that Linda Perry was looking for me to produce a new artist. She’d just had a couple of big hits with Pink and Christina Aguilera. I figured that if she was crazy enough to sign a new artist from SXSW I might be crazy enough to record him. James’s demo tape was all over the place, but You’re Beautiful and Goodbye My Lover were on there. We had a lunch meeting and I didn’t know what he looked like, but when he walked in with his manager I immediately felt a connection and thought: “That’s gotta be him.” I visited him in his flat in London and he played me the songs on the instruments he wrote them on, to get the dodgy demos out of my mind. We did a lot of the recording at my home studio, which was unusual back then, but the budget was modest. One day we were doing the strings with a quartet and something wasn’t right. Strings are expensive, so I called the arranger in to see if we could work out why. The strings needed a tweak but it was the first time I’d been able to step back and just listen and I just got that chill you get sometimes when you know a song is special or is going to connect very, very widely. A few months later, You’re Beautiful had blown the heck up and he was doing two nights at Shepherd’s Bush Empire. We went to a pub near the venue and outside we got mobbed. I said: “James, remember a few months ago, we were having a beer and nobody knew who you were?” And he said: “Yeah, wasn’t it great?!” James Blunt’s new album, Once Upon a Mind, is out now. He tours the UK from 14-22 February.
When Ugra Karma made the first-ever Nepali metal recording, they didn’t intend to start a subculture. They just wanted to make life easier for themselves. “When we started to do shows,” says guitarist Prateek Raj Neupane, “our playing skills were at an amateur level. And the instruments we had were amateurish. And the sound didn’t come out good. We couldn’t explain what we wanted to sound engineers at shows, so we thought maybe we should do a record and give it to them so they could fix our sound. And that’s how we ended up recording the first-ever metal record in Nepal.” That was in 2000 and the recording – the magnificently titled demo Himalayan Metal of Death, featuring a song called Perversion or Cutting Up of a Human Body & Eating Some of It – wasn’t made for general release. “We were thinking about bringing out three copies only, for the three people who recorded it. We would lend one to sound engineers at gigs. But our friends were adamant on us at least making 100 copies. We brought one of our friends’ father’s office printers to my home, made our own design and printed it.” The Nepali metal underground was born. Back then, it was so underground that Ugra Karma, who were without a drummer, couldn’t even explain what death metal was to whoever filled in on the drum stool. “We would ask, ‘Do you play double bass drums?’” That’s the high-speed pummelling that powers death metal along. “They would tell us something like that didn’t even exist. So we switched instruments between songs. In one, I would do guitar and vocals, my friend would do bass, the other would do drums. But because we are not real drummers, we would get tired, so then I would go to drums and the other one would go to guitars. And then switch again.” In truth, all metal in Nepal is still underground. This is one of the world’s poorest countries – ranked in the bottom quarter in the world for GDP per capita – and subject to political instability. The country was still recovering from a 10-year civil war that ended in 2006 when it was devastated by an earthquake in 2015. Corruption is endemic and the combination of denim, leather and long hair is still viewed with suspicion. Its music industry hasn’t the slightest interest in metal, which means everything has to be DIY. For years, the police would pick up metal fans and cut off their long hair. Everyone mentions this as if it were a perfectly everyday thing. While that has stopped, the metal community still doesn’t have it easy: being a metalhead requires a level of commitment unknown in the west. “Recently, I was in jail for 15 days for putting on a thrash fest,” says Vishal Rai, who founded the Extreme Underground Metal Society of Nepal, which organises shows in the country. “Cops arrived in a van and said, ‘What kind of a noise is this?’ They took me in and charged me under noise pollution. I was kept inside for 15 days. This was a few months back. I am still on parole.” This is the world in which the eighth edition of Silence festival exists. Nepal’s biggest metal event, established by Bikrant Shestra of the band Underside, is tiny by western standards: it takes place in two courtyards of a small hotel and restaurant complex in Kathmandu. But for Nepali metal, to have 1,500 or so fans in one place to watch a succession of bands across two stages one Saturday in mid-December is huge. There are local groups – the excellent stoner rock trio Shree 3; Born in Silence, who owe such a debt (visually and sonically) to one particular band that they might as well be called KnotSlip; grindcore band Chepang, who have three singers, two drummers and no bassist; Prateek’s other death metal band, Binaash; and Underside themselves. There are bands from around Asia. And there is a big-name headliner: Californian thrash veterans Testament. The day before Silence, though, there’s a sense of nervousness. It has been raining hard in Kathmandu, which means the site isn’t ready. Driving round the city, the surrounding mountains hidden from view by the lowering clouds and the traffic jostling on rutted and puddled roads, it’s hard to imagine how anyone could make a festival work here. And, as Underside’s singer Avishek KC explains, Nepal has a pay-on-the-day culture, and if the rain stays, the fans won’t come. What’s more, Testament’s fee alone accounts for more than the ticket revenue a sold-out event will bring, a situation made more worrying by the fact that one of the biggest sponsors has halved its funding. Worse still, Underside – the most popular metal band in Nepal – can’t even play their own festival: their drummer lives in Assam, in India, and can’t leave his girlfriend’s home because of the civil unrest there. There is gunfire outside the house and flights have been suspended. Silence is clearly not going to make its organisers rich. Festival director Flower KC, who also manages Underside, reckons this one will lose £25,000, all covered by him and his friends. “The idea is guided by the idea that why should it be only mountaineers or hippies who come to Nepal?” Flower says. “Why can’t we attract a different breed of people? My goal is to make Nepal a heavy metal destination. Testament came to play purely because it was in Kathmandu – I hung out with them and they were stoked to be here. “Fast forward 10 to 15 years, my dream is that our festival makes music fans want to travel to Nepal to see the sickest bands.” But he needs international sponsorship. “We don’t have infinite money, and sponsorship games are pretty weird in this country.” While the people who run the festival might be middle-class by Nepali standards, they are not in western terms – all the Nepali metal musicians have other jobs. Prateek plays guitar in two bands, teaches leadership to management students in college, and acts in Nepali movies; Flower, who lives in the UK, works in local government in London. Money matters here. “If you want to see real Nepal, you have to step out of the city,” Avishek says. “And people in the villages – until two years ago, you had all these power cut-offs, 18 hours a day without power. So people didn’t even have a choice to listen to music.” Prateek adds: “Working class here means something very different from England. They are so busy trying to get food and shelter for today that they do not have the luxury to come to gigs and listen to music and, in their terms, waste time.” Being middle class, and having other avenues open to them, few metal bands last long – and fans don’t tend to stick with the scene far into their 20s. “They will regularly follow metal up to college,” says Vishal Rai. “But after college, they will get pressure from society and family to find a job. After college, they mostly follow a different lifestyle. But there are a few people who always stick to metal, like me. I’m very old to be into this stuff – I am 35.” Having such a young scene is healthy in some ways, Prateek says. There are always young bands and fresh fans coming along. But because the scene is so young, no one has their own money, which means ticket prices have stayed low for 20 years, making it impossible for bands to even cover their costs. “Make the tickets expensive,” he says. “Forget that 100 rupee [£1] bullshit. Make it 1,000. People need to learn that gigs are expensive. And there is a reason for that. If you hire a sound system, it will cost you. The venue will charge you. The venue gets paid, the sound system gets paid. But the bands – who are the core of the show, who the people come to see – aren’t paid.” Avishek notes that Underside, who can draw 800 people in Kathmandu, charged an unprecedented price for their last headline show: 500 rupees. A fiver, in British money. Despite overnight storms, Saturday dawns clear. In the early morning, women are at the city’s wells, taking advantage of the good weather to get their washing done. Worshippers are making their clockwise walks around the roadside shrines that dot the city. And at the festival site, volunteers, having been unable to work the previous day, frantically pull everything together. Silence kicks off just a few minutes late and the crowd swells as the afternoon wears on. The majority of fans are local, with a few Europeans and Americans. One Peace Corps worker, who has come in from out of town, is sporting a T-shirt from the recent Extreme Gore Fest III event. When he went in the pit there, he says, everyone fled because he was twice their height and they thought he’d crush them. The whole thing is fabulous: supremely good-natured and cooperative. There are local oddities: instead of the battle jackets – sleeveless denim covered with patches beloved of western metalheads – a fair few of the fans have sewn a big patch on to the back of a piece of entirely unmetal clothing. I see a Napalm Death patch on the back of a plaid shirt, though I’m not sure the lad who has attached a Pantera patch to the back of his waterproof has done its weather-resistant qualities any good. Best of all, Underside get their moment of glory after all. On learning of their drummer-less state, Testament’s Gene Hoglan – a legend in thrash metal – volunteers to spend the afternoon learning four songs so they can play a short set. Avishek is almost shaking with excitement when he tells me. “Gene Hoglan is going to play with Underside! Gene fucking Hoglan!” After night falls, Testament take to the stage, the biggest metal band ever to have come to Nepal. Their singer, Chuck Billy, surveys the crowd. He’s played to thousands of audiences, most bigger than this, but I’ve rarely seen a man look so delighted to be fronting a band. “How are you fucking doing?” he shouts, then pauses to laugh. “Kathmandu?” And he shakes his head in disbelief.
Butlin’s, Bognor Regis John Cale and Jesus and Mary Chain line up with newbies Black Country, New Road and Nova Twins in a January festival as bracing as the wind whipping off the Channel 3 / 5 stars 3 out of 5 stars. A wild reception … Amy Love of Nova Twins performing at Rockaway Beach festival. A wild reception … Amy Love of Nova Twins performing at Rockaway Beach festival. Photograph: Tony Jupp While much of the country detoxes after Christmas and new year, a small corner of the south coast continues toxing like nothing’s the matter. Lubricated with a blend of lager and glucose-intense alcopops that would profoundly trouble Joe Wicks, Rockaway Beach, which takes over a Butlin’s holiday camp in Bognor Regis, nevertheless manages to blow at least some cobwebs away with a weekend of diverse indie rock that’s often as bracing as the wind whipping off the Channel. It is more modest in scale than the ATP and Bloc holiday camp weekenders of old, but still has the wonderful cognitive dissonance of installing a load of indie nerds into a space set up for family fun. Dad-bods convene in a wave machine to sluice away the previous night’s hangover; there is heavy flirting between leather-clad individuals among a cluster of VR experiences; Burger King is always a moment of weakness away. Into this calorie-rich, responsibility-poor arena are pitched a heap of indie up-and-comers topped with a smattering of legends. Black Country, New Road, though slightly hampered by a lack of volume, show why they’re one of the most exciting new acts in the country. The band’s spoken-word vocalist, Isaac Wood, has the air of a man inhaling deeply from a handkerchief he’s stolen from a woman’s handbag, a febrile and intense psychosexual energy powered up by the almost Balkan sax and fiddle to his left; they also have something of the 1990s Chicago school of jazzy post-rock, only less polite. Garage rock abounds, from Peter Perrett, celebrating his 50th wedding anniversary with new wave romances, to Our Girl’s pleasant enough slacker ballads and Welsh trio Adwaith’s charismatic bilingual songs that also, on Wine Time, bring in a slick, soft-rock wedding band edge. Speaking of wedding bands, you could do much worse for your nuptials than booking Princesteen, a covers band who alternate between Prince and Bruce Springsteen, and Self Esteem also blasts through the indie with tightly harmonised pop originals that recall girl groups from the Ronettes to En Vogue. Heavier moments include post-punk trio the Sweet Release of Death, who build an intense atmosphere between their peppy rhythm section and a gorgeous squall of echoing lead guitar. Nova Twins get a wild reception for their assault of double fuzz-guitars and rap-rock vocals somewhere between Zack de la Rocha and Nicki Minaj at her most eyelid-retracted; Life, with a frontman in the same narcissistic-mime heritage as Jarvis Cocker and Alex Kapranos, blaze at high speed through robust, ranting post-punk pop songs. Headlining is John Cale, with a set that has some ponderous sub-Scott Walker moments obliterated with a psychedelic nosedive through Waiting for the Man. Jesus and Mary Chain round off Saturday with a reminder that, for all their occasional tendency towards haze, they’re a rock’n’roll band. Jim Reid’s voice initially feels too thin, a papery reed buzzing in the wind, but this soon becomes the core of their appeal – it’s as if he slinks up to you through the fog and inveigles himself, letting you in on secrets: “I want to die just like JFK …” And closing the weekend are Fontaines DC, who are energetic but moodier than on record, the chirpy musicality of Grian Chatten’s melodies pared down into a flatter bleat. It’s as dourly beautiful as a January day, much like this entire festival – it lacks the razzle and ambition of a major summer event, and some of the music is a little grey, but it is nonetheless a spirited alternative to a weekend spent spiralising courgettes and looking up yoga routines on YouTube.
Breaking free of her rigidly controlled persona, the former YouTube sensation’s new album is repetitive but sincere Moments of musical complexity … Poppy. Moments of musical complexity … Poppy. Photograph: Jesse Draxler Moriah Pereira, AKA Poppy, emerged in 2014 as a YouTube sensation, pitched as a fictional character: a video of her eating candy floss garnered over two million views. When she started releasing albums on Diplo’s label, it was impossible to separate her performance art from her bubblegum pop. But as Poppy’s fictional world expanded, Pereira became embroiled in IRL controversy. She and character co-creator Titanic Sinclair were sued for plagiarism by Sinclair’s former partner. Poppy defended Sinclair, until 2019, when she accused him of “manipulative patterns” and they parted ways. On her new LP, Poppy is heavy with industry baggage, but liberated, too: she has a new label and is operating without her former collaborator. I Disagree opens with Concrete and the sinister whisper “bury me six feet deep”: her lyrics circle themes of death, rebirth, vengeance and freedom. To underscore her personal transformation, she’s embraced a nu-metal reinvention. Of course, this is Poppy, and so repetitive, Twitter bot-like lyrics remain the norm (“Chewy chewy / Yummy yummy yummy”, goes one refrain). But there are moments of musical complexity and bracing sincerity that her previous albums have lacked: Anything Like Me channels restrained rage in the vein of Billie Eilish; the title track flits convincingly between whispers and screams, while Fill the Crown, propelled by a bass line indebted to Robyn’s Dancing on My Own, offers brilliantly ridiculous gothy growls. She ends the album by singing angelically, “You can be anyone you want to be”: having broken free of a rigid persona, Poppy’s reboot is surprisingly compelling.
Field Music: Making a New World review – a concept stronger than the songs Phil Mongredien 4-5 minutes Peter and David Brewis of Field Music at the Imperial War Museum Peter (left) and David Brewis of Field Music at the Imperial War Museum, where Making a New World was first performed. Photograph: Imperial War Museum A concept album viewing the last century through the filter of the first world war, Field Music’s seventh album was initially composed and performed by Peter and David Brewis for the Imperial War Museum early last year. Each of its 19 tracks reflects on a different consequence of the great war, whether in the form of societal change (council housing; female suffrage) or technological advances (in foetal medicine; the invention of sanitary towels). Such is the ambitious scope of the concept, however, that the individual songs can seem like an afterthought, eclipsed by the weight of all that they’re trying to say. I Thought You Were Something Else, for example, is a perfectly pleasant minute of instrumental loungey jazz that purports to be about a breakthrough in epidemiology in the wake of the 1919 flu pandemic, but could just as plausibly be about Aston Villa’s 1982 European Cup triumph. As a consequence, while the elastic basslines of the Talking Heads-indebted Only in a Man’s World and Money Is a Memory stand out, Making a New World works best as a single piece of music, not least because some of its interstices are too fragile to stand unaided.
The Brewis brothers’ concept album about the impact of the first world war brings left-field pop to topics ranging from skin grafts to period shame A strong set of tunes … Field Music. A strong set of tunes … Field Music. Photograph: Sebastian Matthes This 40-minute, 19-song cycle about the aftermath of the first world war isn’t the most obvious commercial follow-up to Field Music’s glorious 2018 Top 30 album, Open Here. In fact, Making a New World was originally a commission for performances in the Imperial War Museum, but Peter and David Brewis felt proud enough of the resulting songs to release them as a concept album. The opening two short instrumentals evoke artillery fire on either side of the armistice: there are percussion sounds like falling bombs and mournful, Erik Satie-like pianos and eerie near-silences. Songs segue into each other as war is considered from unusual angles. The lovely A Change of Heir is about the pioneering skin graft work that led to today’s gender reassignment surgery. Coffee or Wine ponders the armistice agreement from the perspective of a traumatised officer returning home to a much-changed family life. Money Is a Memory brings a dash of Chic to the subject of post-war reparations, but the often oblique lyrics are never allowed to stand in the way of another strong set of tunes, rooted in left-field pop (notably XTC) and disco. Only in a Man’s World, a song about the development of sanitary towels and how advertising treats menstruation as something shameful, finds David Brewis barking, “Why should a woman feel ashamed?” in the manner of Talking Heads’ Once in a Lifetime. Between Nations is another gem, a gently gear-shifting, psychedelic landscape about – of course – the futility of war.
t smells like nirvana. Up here in Madrona, one of Seattle's smartest neighbourhoods, the air from Lake Washington breezes new and sweet. The trees, their leaves shiny, add an extra tang of their own, and what breath you have is taken away by the view. It's the kind of place which makes visitors sigh, "I could live here." No wonder the street signs welcome you to "Madrona - The Peaceable Kingdom". But one house on the hill has been spoiled. Black plastic tarpaulins hang from the trees to keep out prying eyes, bed-sheets have been pulled across the windows. Nevertheless, you can still see into the room above the detached garage, the room estate agents would call "the mother-in-law apartment". The patterned lino is visible, so is the bare table, and the vase of pink tulips placed on the floor to mark the exact spot where Kurt Cobain took a shotgun and blew his brains out. The birds keep singing outside, undisturbed by the police paraphernalia that has cordoned off the driveway since Cobain's body was found. Occasionally a robin comes down to peck at the pools of red candlewax, leftovers from the vigil of fans who gathered here the moment Seattle radio stations declared April 8 the day the music died. They were mourning the passing of the king of grunge, the frontman of Nirvana whose 1991 hit, Smells Like Teen Spirit, was credited with exporting the Seattle sound worldwide, injecting "indie rock" into the mainstream, and so altering the course of modern music. The grown-up media followed close behind, reporting that Kurt Cobain's death had deprived the world's twentysomethings of a spokesman, that Generation X had lost its crown prince. To outsiders, the fuss was hard to fathom. For one thing, Nirvana's music is an acquired taste, a blend of punk and metal, in which melody is often buried under layers of sheer noise. And Cobain's story seemed so obvious, so familiar. The words "Rock 'n' Roll Suicide" came so easily - and Kurt Cobain's demise had all the elements. From the coma induced by a tranquilliser-and-champagne cocktail in Rome a month earlier (now regarded as a first suicide attempt), to the tales of long-term heroin addiction, to the self-pitying note he left behind - it was a saga of self-destruction that made Cobain look like nothing more than a Nineties Sid Vicious. Nirvana Nirvana photographed in Belfast in 1992. Photograph: Steve Pyke/Getty Images But the seven thousand Seattleites who gathered in a memorial service for him - venting their sense of betrayal by chanting a chorus of "Fuck You, Kurt", led by the star's widow, punk singer Courtney Love - felt they had lost something special. "Kurt died for your sins," bellowed one overwrought fan to his fellow mourners. Another showed off the K-U-R-T scar she had razored on to her wrist. There was a ritual burning of flannel shirts, the trademark garment of grunge. For these people, and for the ten million others who bought Nevermind, Nirvana's blockbuster album, Cobain was a musical original. He was, too, a symbol of his generation and even of his country. But not quite in the way those early obituarists would have you believe. KurtCobain's life and music were much more complex, more riven by tension, than the simple, voice-of-alienated-youth eulogies let on. His 27 years included ironies and confusions that do not fit easily into the conventional Generation X wisdom, but ultimately reflect what it is that distinguishes today's under-30s, and perhaps modern America itself. This roomy house, complete with skylights and an exterior of grey, wood-slice tiles, is a case in point. Generation X-ers are meant to be the slacker generation, yet here was the slacker-in-chief living the yuppie dream: married, padding around a $ 1.1 million luxury mansion with a garden for his baby daughter to play in, and Microsoft and Boeing executives for neighbours. It proved to be no refuge for Kurt Cobain, the boy who had come from blue-collar nowhere and made himself an international star and millionaire. Holed up inside the house overlooking the perfume-scented lake, he pumped his veins full of heroin, wrote his rambling suicide note, and did so much damage to his head that police could only identify his body through fingerprints. Dental records were no use, because nothing was left of his mouth. The neighbourhood will soon be back to normal. No one would ever admit it, but there is probably some relief that there will never again be nights like the one last year when police arrested Cobain after a resident reported hearing the sounds of domestic violence. (He and his wife insisted they were merely jamming and then play-fighting around the house). And no repeat of the March 18 episode - just days after the Rome crisis - when Love called out the emergency services after her husband locked himself in the bathroom with three pistols, a rifle and 25 rounds of ammunition. Now the house will be quiet. And soon there will only be a trace of irony hanging over the sign, not 50 yards from the Cobain residence, that says "Madrona - drug free zone." Listening to tonight's line-up at the Crocodile Cafe, grunge's equivalent of the Liverpool Cavern, you realise that Kurt Cobain got lucky. Nirvana once performed at the Crocodile to an audience of six, and they could easily still be here. They did not invent the sound called grunge, but they got the breaks: among them a session on the John Peel show, and the cover of Melody Maker. (Seattle acknowledges that Britain was first to shift the city from the furthest northwestern tip of the US to the centre of the rock universe.) The punters at the Crocodile, in their punk-hippie hybrid garb of goatees, dungarees, and clothes from Value Village (this area's Oxfam) all say grunge died long before Kurt Cobain. It died when it became big, when the fashion industry got hold of it. Now, they say, they dress the way they do because "we're poor and it rains a lot", and if they occasionally still tie a flannel shirt around their waist, well, that's because it gets cold. They give equally short shrift to the notion that Cobain was any kind of spokesman for Generation X, or that any such thing exists. "It's just a way to market us," says Teresa de la Rosa, 24. Next to her is Gary Paul, 28, who, despite a college degree is working as a postman - a textbook case of the X syndrome which has overeducated kids working in low-status, low-paid jobs, from office temps to despatch riders. All around him are people in the same position, but he is adamant that there is nothing that unites them. "I think the media are making a big thing of it," he says. Kurt Cobain would find such talk gratifying. He was utterly disdainful of his own role as the "voice of a generation". Central to his message was a rejection of what he saw as the crude, commercial motive of labelling an age group. The "Teen Spirit" satirised in Cobain's most famous song is a deodorant aimed at young girls. The fact that Nirvana made millions by appealing to a niche market, partly defined by youth, was an irony not lost on Cobain, who wrote the words and music to all Nirvana's songs, as well as singing and playing the guitar on all of them. The opening lyric of In Utero, the band's last album, was direct: "Teenage angst has paid off well, Now I'm bored and old." It seems funny, this contract that existed between Kurt Cobain and people like the Crocodile crowd: they deny they are a group, and he denied that he represented them. But one can't fully escape the other. So much of what these kids are about - even if they deny it - was reflected in his short, urgent life. Kurt Cobain Oh well, whatever, never mind: 'That was his message, that life is futile'. Photograph: Stephen Sweet/Rex Features Take the definitive extract of Cobain poetry, the couplet in Teen Spirit that manages to evoke disillusion, fatalism and inertia in a stroke. "I found it hard, it was hard to find," he croaks, "Oh well, whatever, never mind." "That was his message, that life is futile," muses 26-year-old Bob Hince, who has completed six years of study in molecular biology but is now heading for Alaska to work as a salmon fisherman. His dyed red hair nearly covers his eyes, falling behind the lenses of his retro, Buddy Holly glasses. He's drinking bloody Marys tonight, and paying no attention to Flake, the band strutting furiously on stage. "It's just ambivalence. You're at a crossroads, and you don't know what to do," he says. "What am I supposed to be?" Hince says his employment prospects have left him feeling bottled up with anger. "We all are. We all feel the monotony, we all feel we cannot control our circumstances." And all those feelings are there, in the music. If it's frustration you're after, there's the screaming rage of Cobain's singing, the screech of metallic guitar noise and lyrics like, "Gotta find a way, a better way." Alienation? Try "Stay Away", or the verse which explains, "I'm not like them, but I can pretend." Paralysis? How about Come As You Are, which urges, "Take your time, hurry up." And for sheer pent-up anger, taken neat, there's Tourette's, a hoarse tirade on In Utero. Lyric: "Fuck, shit, piss." The untrained ear might strain to hear what's new in all this. After all, punk, with its near-identical message, happened a long time ago. Nearly 20 years have passed since the Sex Pistols swore at Bill Grundy, and the Adverts - to name but one - snarled, "It's no time to be 21, To be Anyone." Kurt Cobain saw this point himself. "I'm the first to admit that we're the Nineties version of Cheap Trick," he said once, and he constantly cited the influence on him of charmingly-named, if little-known British punk bands like the Raincoats and the Vaselines. But punk never made the breakthrough in the US that it did in Britain. The Sex Pistols may have reshaped the pop landscape in the UK, but punk stayed marginal here. "It didn't really catch on," remembers Jeff Gilbert, Seattle-based writer for Guitar World. The result was a vacuum which Kurt Cobain stepped into effortlessly. "Things had gone soft on us and Nirvana gave it a real boot to the butt," says Gilbert. What Never Mind The Bollocks did for the UK, Nevermind did across the Atlantic. But Cobain did more than resuscitate punk to rehash perennial themes of teen rebellion. He had an instinctive feel for what made his audience's growing pains different from those of their predecessors. According to Newsweek, "grunge is what happens when children of divorce get their hands on guitars". The one hard item of demographics amid all the guff about Generation X is that, more than any other group in history, they come from broken homes. "I know only two people whose parents aren't divorced, and one of them - his mother got shot," muses Bob's friend, Mara Rivet, 22, an assistant at Tower Records. She knows that Kurt Cobain's mum and dad, a secretary and a car mechanic, split when he was 10. She's heard him sing, "As my bones grew, they did hurt/They hurt really bad/I tried hard to have a father/But instead I had a Dad." Bob, Mara and friends understood what Cobain was up to when he jetted off to Hawaii to marry Courtney Love, leader of the band Hole, in 1992. They watched the ceremony (not knowing that Cobain was juiced on heroin at the time), and wished him luck. They had heard the star say he proposed to Love because she was "the best fuck in the world", and they'd seen him show the scratches on his back to prove it, but they identified with another, deeper motive. They knew well that urge to find a home, to belong to a family. "I was in search of the Brady Bunch, and I didn't find it," smiles Mara, deploying one of the X-ers' favoured cultural touchstones. She ran away after her parents' break-up, and curses Cobain for inflicting a similar, parentless future on the 19-month-old Frances Bean he has left behind. Having seen Cobain's attempt at domestic bliss fail, she is more pessimistic than ever. "There is no Brady Bunch family, goddammit. It's TV, and you're not told." The cynicism is unsparing. Bereft of the idealism of flower-power, or even the exuberant iconoclasm of punk, grunge is a movement entirely without coherent politics. "There are little things we do, like vegetarianism," says Mara, "but we all know that in the end it'll all be futile." "There's nothing to believe in anymore," says Mindy Brown, enjoying a night off from looking after her three-year-old daughter. She remembers taking sedatives to calm her fears of a nuclear holocaust. Now she gets her news from MTV. "We all believe there's nothing to believe in." Kurt was the same way, stumbling only rarely into politics. He occasionally called on his fans to support the rights of women and gays. But he spoke just as often about his passion for guns. He kept an M-16 and 10,000 rounds of ammunition in the hall cupboard, unselfconsciously parroting the right-wing line about the right of Americans to protect themselves. This is what distinguishes Nirvana and its generation most from the teen rebellions that have come before. Hippies and punks were both public movements, whether they were strumming to stop the Vietnam war or spitting about Anarchy In The UK. Both believed in the possibility of change. But Cobain, like the 20-plussers who listen to him, was private and self-absorbed. "What is wrong with me?" he sang. "I'm so tired, I can't sleep." He knew this introspection was unattractive, once describing his public image as a "pissy, complaining, freaked-out schizophrenic who wants to kill himself all the time." But that only made him loathe himself more. In this, he was a Generation X exemplar. "We're spoilt, rotten brats," says Mindy. "Slap Us!" Typically, Cobain's suicide note, read by Courtney Love to the thousands at the Seattle service, did not complain about Aids or divorce or homelessness or any of the other things said to be preoccupying the post-1965 generation. It talked about the chronic stomach condition which Cobain always said impelled him to use heroin, "to medicate himself". "I thank you," he wrote, "from the pit of my burning, nauseous stomach …" It was somehow a perfectly apt ailment. For one thing, it proved that Cobain's pain was no affectation: he felt it deep in his gut. But it was also grimly appropriate that the boy-prince of the brat generation should die complaining of a tummy ache. "Our parents built up this sense of expectation, and we can't live up to it," whines Bob Hince about his economic future. Cobain reflected even this, the ugliest of Generation X's traits: its passivity, its self-pitying feeling of entitlement, its expectation that mummy and daddy owe them a future. Cobain was smart enough to send up the sentiment. "Here we are now, entertain us," he wailed in Teen Spirit. And his grieving widow, reading his suicide note to the fans, was able to show similar contempt. When she came to the passage in which Cobain moaned that he was a "sad, little, sensitive Pisces-Jesus man", she stopped reading and yelled at the ghost of her dead husband, "Oh, shut up!" Kurt Cobain and Courtney Love with daughter Frances Bean at the MTV Video Music awards in 1993 Kurt Cobain and Courtney Love with their daughter Frances Bean at the MTV Video Music awards in 1993. Photograph: Ron Galella Ltd/WireImage Aberdeen, Washington is not yet a shrine, but it may become one soon. Already, graffiti adorns the wall of a burnt-out restaurant: Kurt Cobain RIP. This shabby, peeling town of 16,000 lumbermen, loggers and fisherman, was where the frail, blue-eyed blond with a penchant for drawing and poetry grew up. The 100-mile road between here and Seattle is full of lorries packed with tree-trunks, stacked like cigarettes. There is timber everywhere, firs and pines scraping the sky like sharp pencils, and cut into tiles on the houses - including the neat, green one where Kurt Cobain's mother still lives. Her son was born in February 1967, and, he said later, he was happy for seven years after that. (In his farewell letter, he wrote that he had felt "hateful toward all humans in general" from age seven onwards). His parents divorced when he was eight, and he didn't speak to his father until he started making hit records. After the divorce, the child turned inward. The teachers at Aberdeen High School remember him as withdrawn, someone the other kids would avoid. "When I had him in class, the anger was definitely there," recalls Bob Hunter, a soft-spoken art teacher whose classes Cobainmade a point of attending. (He bunked off most of the others, only to sneak back into the library.) Surveying his art-room, Hunter points out Kurt's seat, close to his own. A rock station is playing on the radio, just as it would have done then. Cobain used to offer a song-by-song critique of whatever came on, usually "pretty sarcastic", says Hunter. The teacher held on to oneCobain effort which he thought showed exceptional "originality, creativity and sophistication". It was a pencil drawing that showed, in 12 stages, the transformation of a sperm into a foetus. Ironically, given his ultimate fate, Cobain seems to have been far more obsessed with birth than death. Several hired cleaners fled his Seattle home after they spotted his collection of model foetuses, bought from a medical supplies manufacturer. He used the smashed remnants of some of them to assemble a collage for the sleeve of In Utero - which led the Wal-Mart store chain to ban the record. Cobain was bored by school and dropped out, passing up an art school scholarship. He became a janitor at the YMCA, living with the family of another Aberdeen High teacher, LaMont Schillinger, whose sons were friends of his. Cobain came to stay for a few days, after a row with his mother's boyfriend. He ended up rooming there for a year. "I think Kurt was a kid that nobody ever got to know," says Mr Schillinger now. Cobain later told a biographer that he began shooting up heroin while he stayed at the Schillingers', but the head of the household thinks his former lodger made the story up, mischievously seeking to inflate his own rock 'n' roll myth. The boy LaMont Schillinger remembers took his turn cooking, cleaning, chopping wood. He may have also been running around town spray-painting "Abort Christ" on born again Christians' pick-up trucks, but at the Schillinger table he sat quietly, even during grace. The teacher's pupils have been asking about the suicide, accusing Kurt Cobain of an act of gross selfishness. "He was an inward-directed person," Mr Schillinger has been telling them. "I don't think there was a choice." At Rosevear's music store, the only one in town, Kurt Cobain's spirit was always in the air, even before he died. Manager Les Blue, a music enthusiast with Wayne's World looks, had thought of putting up a No Nirvana sign - to deter the legions of wannabe guitarists who all try out the merchandise the same way, playing the intro to Smells Like Teen Spirit. Blue has strong memories of Aberdeen's most famous son, from the days when he, Blue, managed the local drive-in. "He graffitied the hell out of my bathroom," he says. In red marker, Cobain wrote HEROIN next to a picture of a syringe, and the words SID AND NANCY. He heard Nirvana play before they were Nirvana - when they were Pen Cap Chew; Ted, Ed, Fred and Skid Row. "They kinda sucked," he recalls. Their eventual success was, says Blue, an inspiration to Aberdeen, a town depressed by cutbacks in the logging industry, forced by environmental regulations. "People thought, 'If they can do it, anybody can do it."' A cassette of Blue's own band is on sale at the counter, just in case. There is an irony in this late embrace of Kurt Cobain by the people of his hometown. It takes only a brief visit to the local music venue to see how miserable a time he would have had fitting in here. In Aberdeen, which even now has Wild West-style saloons and card rooms, new bands cut their teeth at the Pour House, a wooden tavern where the men wear tattoos and mean it. This must have been a harsh training for the waif-like performer, who, once in liberal Seattle, was fond of donning his wife's cotton dresses, lining his eyes, and painting his nails a lurid red. Many in Cobain's position would have gloated as Nirvana's success turned many of the redneck jocks who had made a sport of beating up young Kurt into loyal fans. But it gave the singer no pleasure. The chorus of In Bloom was a musical jeer at the band's new audience: "He's the one who likes all our pretty songs, and he likes to sing along, and he likes to shoot his gun, but he don't know what it means," sneered Cobain. It twisted his stomach to think that he was providing a soundtrack to the lives of those he despised. When he learned that his song, Polly, an ironic essay with a rapist-narrator, had been used as musical accompaniment to a real-life gang rape, he was horrified. On the sleeve notes for his Incesticide album, he issued a plea: "If any of you in any way hate homosexuals, people of different colour, or women, please - leave us the fuck alone." The fact that Nirvana struck a chord not only with Generation X, but with a large swathe of blue-collar white, male America - men with despair and alienation of their own - was just one of dozens of problems Kurt Cobain had with success. For a champion of the punk ethic of anti-commercialism, multi-million record sales were a confusion. And intrusion by the press into his private life was insupportable for a man who had been a loner since childhood. "It was so fast and explosive," he said once, "I didn't know how to deal with it. If there was a rock star course, I would have liked to take it. It might have helped me." The life that suddenly became possible for Kurt Cobain was riddled with contradiction. The layabout rock-star now lived in a Seattle suburb with a little girl, a working wife, and a home in the country. He was feeding a heroin habit that was draining $ 400 a day (the largest daily dose dispensed by his cash-machine), driving to his dealer in a Volvo. You could hear the pop junkie and the doting dad fighting it out in the music. On Nirvana records, din and harmony alternate within a single song, sometimes at the same moment. Last year Cobain clashed with the producer of In Utero, who wanted a harder, less commercial sound for the album. Cobain triumphed, and you can hear the melodies, many of them Squeeze- or even Beatles-esque, struggling to break through the sheet metal on top. He promised that future work would be more tuneful, acoustic - even ethereal. Hippies, punks and every other teen movement in history would have taken this Volvo-driven volte-face as a sell-out. But not the twentysomethings, the children of Reagan and Thatcher who have shed politics and who came of age in the consumerist 1980s. X-ers don't have a problem with the system - they just can't find their place in it. They cheered as Cobain seemed to find his. And this is the strangest irony of all. Sceptics have rightly debunked the Generation X idea for failing to account for all those in their mid-20s who are not working in McJobs, but married and high-achieving. These Xuppies probably outnumber the slackers five to one - yet the bizarre fortune of Kurt Cobain was that, by his success, he reflected them, too. That's why stock analysts listened to Nirvana on their car CDs. His disenchantment with success-without-meaning - singing, "I do not want what I have got" - spoke to them, too. Douglas Coupland's novel, which dumped the Generation X moniker into the language, coined another new term: Successophobia. He defined it as "The fear that if one is successful, then one's personal needs will be forgotten". Cobain had a bad case of successophobia. "I just hope," he said in January, "that I don't become so blissful I become boring." One of his best chorus lines was, "I miss the comfort of being sad." He coped by mixing his blood with the soothing nectar of heroin, but its healing power could not last. He had wanted to call his last album, I Hate Myself And I Want To Die. He decided not to because, he said, no one would realise he was joking. Looking at the house on Lake Washington Boulevard, with its space, its quiet, its pure aroma, you feel about Kurt Cobain the way nations around the world often feel about America: why are those who have so much so desperately unhappy? Kurt Cobain's anguish might have been just as poisonous, just as lethal had it remained anonymous. He took his own life for private reasons - it has been reported that his family had a history of suicide - even if those reasons were magnified by the lens of fame. And, in the end, the greatest impact of his death will be private, too. It is now late afternoon, and a black limousine has turned into the driveway. A pale Courtney Love steps out, her platinum hair looking lank, hugging herself in a plain, grey tunic. She clutches a copy of Newsweek, the one which shows a staring picture of her dead husband. She heads immediately for the garage-apartment, getting closer to the spot where Kurt Cobain's body lay for three days before it was discovered. She doesn't see the nanny coming out to greet her, cradling the couple's newly-bereaved baby daughter. For Courtney Love is looking the other way, shouting simply, "Where are you?"
Without abandoning the well-executed anthemics that form the basis of their success, the Manchester band’s sixth album weighs in on the subjects of ageing, alcohol and mental health 3 / 5 stars 3 out of 5 stars. Bucking trends … the Courteeners, from left: Michael Campbell, Liam Fray, Daniel ‘Conan’ Moores. Bucking trends … the Courteeners, from left: Michael Campbell, Liam Fray, Daniel ‘Conan’ Moores. Just before Christmas, the Official Charts Company published the Top 100 biggest-selling singles and albums of the 2010s. If you needed evidence of the commercial collapse of British alt-rock, there it was, in stark figures. The most successful song of the last decade in the genre once called indie was Mr Brightside by the Killers, a single that was actually released 16 years ago, followed by Oasis’s Wonderwall, a song ready to celebrate its silver jubilee. Amid the pop stars and heritage rockers on the album chart, meanwhile, only the Arctic Monkeys, out of all the kind of artists who used to be the NME’s lifeblood, made a showing: an entire genre, once huge, reduced to one band. Given this climate, there is something intriguing about the continued success of Manchester indie hold-outs Courteeners. Even if their albums don’t sell enough to challenge Adele or Ed Sheeran, they consistently go gold, and their live shows are the stuff of arenas, sports stadiums and 50,000-tickets-sold-in-four-hours outdoor events. For a band that big, though, Courteeners’ media profile remains low. Cheerleaders are hard to find, and their album reviews invariably stick at fair-to-middling. To their detractors, their success is a matter of being in the right place at the wrong time: if your idea of a good time is bellowing along to old-fashioned anthemic alt-rock and you’re unconvinced by the 1975’s drift towards mainstream pop, there isn’t really anyone else currently servicing your needs. To their supporters, they’re a wronged band, the pervasive assumption that they’re knuckle-dragging purveyors of bloke rock hiding something more thoughtful and interesting. Which brings us to More. Again. Forever. Although you’re never going to mistake its contents for the new album by Black Midi, it’s certainly a more ambitious undertaking than your average Radio X-friendly artist could be bothered with. Liam Gallagher may yet startle us all by releasing a conceptual work about the complex and fraught relationship with alcohol that ageing brings, complete with spoken-word passages and accompanying short story by an acclaimed young novelist (in the Courteneers’ case, Emma Jane Unsworth, whose 2014 novel Animals covers roughly the same emotional territory as More. Again. Forever.). But it’s probably best not to hold your breath. Frontman Liam Fray’s lyrical thoughts on the subject are of a decidedly mixed quality. He has a penchant for dropping clumsy pop-cultural references with a resounding clang (“Where’s our next Caroline Aherne?”; “I don’t love you enough for my last Rolo”) and an occasional tendency towards Noel-in-philosophical-mode malaproprisms (“burn the midnight oil at both ends”). But he’s also capable of fresher takes and impressively snappy lines: “All we do is go to parties and talk about parties we used to go to” is a neat summing-up of thirtysomething ennui. Better Man and Is Heaven Even Worth It? note that the barrage of available wellness advice can be as bad for your self-esteem as photos of unattainable physical perfection; that if you’re not making “gratitude lists”, regularly meditating and enjoying a plant-based diet, you’re somehow failing. Take It on the Chin has him telling all to a therapist while “sliding down … the chair” in embarrassment, haunted by the thought that this really isn’t the way that men, particularly northern men, are supposed to behave, and imagining his “archaic Uncle Anthony” looking on aghast. The music, too, presents a mixed bag. Advance talk of the album’s supposed adventurousness may tell you a little less about its contents than the limited palette with which artists in Courteeners’ particular niche are expected to work. You’re listening to a band attempting to push the boat out without scaring anyone off, hence the profusion of some pretty commonplace stuff: piano-ballad-into-singalong-chorus; radio-friendly, REM-ish mid-tempo jangle; AM-era Arctic Monkeys riffing. Its best moments come when it throws caution to the wind, at least relatively speaking: the electro-glam stomp of Heart Attack, the LCD Soundsystem-ish title track; the house-y pulse of Previous Parties. It’s hard not to wish they’d do it more often, although it would be churlish to deny that even the standard-issue tracks are really well-executed. Heavy Jacket, for instance, certainly isn’t telling you anything you haven’t heard already, but its jump-cuts from distorted guitar anthemics to sitar-heavy cod-psychedelic pop are seamless. “The gatekeepers are less than kind,” sings Fray at one point, with the air of a man who knows that Courteeners’ critical lot is unlikely to change, six albums into their career. You can understand his frustration: if he’s not an overlooked genius, on the evidence of More. Again. Forever., he’s a smarter and more insightful lyricist than he gets credit for. But then the album is solid and dependable, rather than a source of head-spinning shocks and thrills: it knows its audience, and it knows better than to confound them if you want to keep bucking trends and filling arenas. This week Alexis listened to Leyla Blue – Peppa Pig Smart, funny bedroom pop by way of lo-fi R&B, complete with shout-outs to both Missy Elliott and, frequently, the porcine cartoon character of the title.
The 18-year-old will be the youngest singer to do a 007 theme but she might prove too contemporary for one of the dustiest film franchises around Billie Eilish in April 2019. Billie Eilish in April 2019. Photograph: Amy Harris/Invision/AP No Time to Die already has a lot going for it. It’s got an exciting director, a promising trailer and – if it adheres to the good/bad/good/bad pattern of James Bond films that began all the way back with Goldeneye – it might mean that Daniel Craig goes out on a high. And now there’s another potential plus in its favour: Billie Eilish is doing the theme tune. What’s especially exciting about this news is that, compared with the last couple of insipid – though admittedly Oscar-winning – efforts, Billie Eilish is refreshing. She’s young. She’s authentic. She has a signature sound that doesn’t automatically align with the overwrought warbling of, say, Sam Smith. The history of the James Bond franchise contains a smattering of fantastic outliers – Live and Let Die, A View to a Kill, We Have All the Time in the World – that have flourished precisely because they haven’t hewed to the ossified blueprint of what constitutes a Bond theme. If this song is as good as the director and producer are promising, then we could really have something special on our hands. Better yet, a title like No Time to Die is a songwriter’s dream, in that lots of things rhyme with the word “die”. Daniel Craig’s Bond tenure has been littered with some truly abysmal titles that were no use to the musical art whatsoever. No wonder so many of them had their performers squirming around loopholes. Nothing rhymes with “Casino Royale”, so Chris Cornell sang a song called You Know My Name. Sam Smith, knowing that any song entitled Spectre would have had to at some point use the word “hectare”, chickened out and sang Writing’s on the Wall instead. Faced with the abomination that was Quantum of Solace, Jack White just made up his own Bond title with Another Way to Die. Only Adele took on the mantle of writing a song named after the actual film, and even she screwed it up by rhyming “sky fall” with “crumble”. So this is a golden opportunity for Eilish. No Time to Die is an open goal of a title, and she has the chops to really make it work. However, let’s not get carried away here. This is James Bond we’re talking about, so we should never underestimate the franchise’s tendency to bungle a sitter. Because, yes, Billie Eilish is authentic and unique and unwilling to turn in a traditional theme. But that doesn’t automatically mean it’ll be any good. Remember when they got Madonna in to jazz up the Bond theme as a genre? Remember how horrible that was? Remember how Die Another Day sounded like a bad song being fed through a worse Bluetooth connection? Or remember how bad Another Way to Die was, with White almost rapping his verses and then Alicia Keys using the chorus to make a noise like she’d just found a dead snake in her bed? Remember Sheryl Crow? Of course you don’t. And that’s the danger with No Time to Die. James Bond is such a creaky old antique of a franchise that change has to come slowly. A nudge here. A bottle of Heineken there. Altering the direction of the Bond films is like piloting a cruise ship. Every change of course has to be slow and incremental. Do a handbrake turn and you’ll kill everyone. Eilish’s minimalistic brand of clicks and whooshes might be good by itself but there’s a real risk it’ll be like painting Pikachu on a Chippendale when it’s set to the hoary old pervert psychedelia of the film’s opening titles. Plus, as much as I hate to say it, one thing has got me really worried about Eilish’s participation in all this. When her involvement was announced, she released a statement saying: “It feels crazy to be a part of this in every way. To be able to score the theme song to a film that is part of such a legendary series is a huge honor. James Bond is the coolest film franchise ever to exist. I’m still in shock.” Did you catch that? Billie Eilish thinks that James Bond is the coolest film franchise ever to exist. No, it isn’t. It’s trad and naff and a full 50% of its instalments are absolutely terrible. Even Daniel Craig wanted out at one point, and he actually is James Bond. This statement shows a worrying lack of taste, especially when the Mission: Impossible films exist. Maybe Eilish should try soundtracking the next one of those instead.
Korean boyband funding works in five cities by 22 artists ‘to send a positive message to the world’ Antony Gormley speaking at the project’s launch at the Serpentine Gallery in London, with BTS connected by video link. Antony Gormley speaking at the project’s launch at the Serpentine Gallery in London, with BTS connected by video link. Photograph: Adrian Dennis/AFP via Getty Images They are clean-cut superstars of K-pop, arguably the most adored boyband in the world, and now BTS can add a new label: global patrons of contemporary art. Details were announced on Tuesday of experimental and technically challenging art projects in London, Seoul, New York, Berlin and Buenos Aires by artists and curators who, the people behind the project said, resonated with the band’s philosophy and principles. It will involve Antony Gormley installing a sculpture using 18km of coiled up aluminium tubing next to the East River in Brooklyn and Tomás Saraceno floating a human being upwards powered only by the sun and air. With a global fanbase of tens of millions of young people, together known as the BTS Army, the idea is seen as an opportunity to introduce contemporary art to completely new audiences. Daehyung Lee – the curator who helped conceive the Connect, BTS initiative and approached the band – said the project was rooted in the idea of “solidarity”. He said: “We can connect with people at opposite ends of the world but we sometimes forget to communicate with our own neighbours or relatives. We are losing solidarity, we have forgotten how to communicate properly with each other.” The Korean band are the main funders of the projects which will involve 22 artists and take place across the world in the coming months. While the figure has not been disclosed, Lee said it did not run into the millions of pounds. “The ultimate goal of the project is to connect individuals across the world as they re-evaluate their present circumstances, attitudes and potentialities.” Gormley will make a version of an installation titled Clearing which featured at his recent show at the Royal Academy in London and consisted of 7km of metal rod coiled up like a drawing in space. New York Clearing 2020 will use more than double the length of metal rod, and will be installed outdoors and barrier-free at Brooklyn Bridge Park Pier 3 with people invited to walk through it. “Clearing has always been made inside an existing architectural space,” Gormley said. “We still don’t know whether this is going to work. We still don’t know whether, in the wind and the cold of New York in January, this will hold. But what an incredible thing … and with BTS’s help we are going to try to make this thing.” The Argentinian artist Saraceno will make a project titled Fly With Aerocene Pacha which he said was a possible solution to the dilemma of human flight, a dream which had become a nightmare. “Every time someone travels across the Atlantic by aeroplane another person’s lifespan is reduced by two years.” In London, the Danish artist Jakob Kudsk Steensen has created a digital simulation of a forest. Titled Catharsis, it can be experienced at the Serpentine Gallery or via catharsis.live until 15 March. The initiative was announced at the Serpentine with a live video link to the seven boyband members giving their support and expressing their desire to “send a positive message to the world” and “give back some of the amazing love that we receive”. The project “represents diversity and creates a collective, positive message for the world that we value”, they said.
ITV’s trashy singing contest is a constant, crushing disappointment – but it’s also a total hoot. Could the bee really be Cara Delevingne? Ridiculously naff ... Tree, Ken Jeong and Pharaoh of The Masked Singer. So bad it’s actually genius ... Tree, Ken Jeong and Pharaoh of The Masked Singer. Photograph: Vincent Dolman/ITV/REX/Shutterstock If I had to describe The Masked Singer to someone who hadn’t seen it I would say it was like the outcome of the “make a TV show” challenge on The Apprentice. In case you have somehow missed its OTT weirdness, the premise is as follows: 12 celebrities sing in outrageous fancy dress costumes, and you – along with a panel of celebrity judges (including Ken Jeong from The Hangover, for some reason) – try to work out who they are. Hence the incredibly strange viral moment that did the rounds last week of “a pharaoh” taking off his mask to reveal the former home secretary Alan Johnson. Let me be clear: The Masked Singer is bad television. The Guardian review of the show gave it one star, calling it a “prerecorded unspectacular crushed at birth by its contrived premise”. There are many moments I know I will recount one day in some form of therapy, such as the time a 6ft duck sang Like a Virgin while also somehow dressed as Madonna, before returning the next week to sing Ave Maria while a jealous chameleon looked on. The celebrities’ speaking voices are troubling, too, having been hidden in such a weird way that they all sound like disoriented, hungover Doctor Who villains. Yet despite all of this, I will watch every episode and think you should, too. Why? Because it turns out that The Masked Singer is so bad – so ridiculously naff – that it may be a work of genius. I’m not the only one who thinks so, either: 5.5 million people watched the first episode, with figures barely dipping since. Entire WhatsApp groups have been dedicated to working out important questions such as: “Could the bee really be Cara Delevingne?” Why? Well, for one thing, this TV format is a form of internet clickbait. The celebrity panel – either intentionally or because they have forgotten they are on an ITV budget – lures you in, its members implying that the person inside each outfit could be anyone, right up to a serious A-lister. Other guesses for the bee, for instance, have included Kylie Minogue, Margot Robbie and Olivia Colman. “Olivia Colman?” you scoff. “Surely not!” Then your mind starts playing tricks on you. Could the Oscar winner be trolling us all, squeezing in a Lewis Capaldi cover between filming episodes of The Crown? After all, the original South Korean version did manage to book Ryan Reynolds. You know for a fact that you will probably end up disappointed but – like clickbait – you cling on anyway. Similarly, the chameleon was thought to have been Idris Elba, Chiwetel Ejiofor or Stormzy. It was in fact Justin Hawkins from The Darkness. The constant, crushing disappointment is strangely compelling. A short film of clues is shown before each performance. One included footage of a butterfly behind some DJ decks. When it was revealed that the winged creature was in fact EastEnders’ Patsy Palmer, we were informed that the decks were a nod to her DJing career in LA. Because of course! The Masked Singer shouldn’t exist. Television has never been more highbrow and far-reaching – and yet so many of us are choosing to watch a hedgehog attempt karaoke. This is for the same reason Channel 5 still dedicates serious prime-time to celebrities ranking various chocolate bars and biscuits, and why ITV once aired a one-off show celebrating 20 years of the Black Eyed Peas presented by “their friend” Joanna Lumley. This is not an accident. They know we crave this stuff – and so does social media. The Masked Singer really is the best kind of trash TV … not least when you’re watching Jeong’s face during the celebrity reveal, gauging just how confused he is. In fact, I’m waiting for the inevitable next step: a scenario in which the members of celebrity panel spend their entire lives trying to guess who is behind the mask, only for the talent to be so low-rent that even they hadn’t heard of them. If that wouldn’t make for appallingly watchable TV, I don’t know what would.
Brixton Academy, London Scissor-kicking, Seoul-based outfit delight fans with a celebration of sweet chaos on their second UK appearance Day6 at New York’s Playstation Theatre in September. Day6 at New York’s Playstation Theatre in September. Photograph: Brian Ach/Invision/AP Sympathy is extended to Day6 fans who arrive too late to bag a spot at the front of the queue. By 7am on Sunday, 100 determined MyDays – the collective fan name – are already in place outside Brixton Academy, and will have the choicest view of the five-man K-rock outfit when the show starts, 12 hours later. But even the tardiest MyDays, still trailing in when Day6 kick off with the dual shoutalongs, Best Part and Sing Me, are rewarded with a performance that’s both frenetic gig and mass self-affirmation exercise. And there’s the primary difference between the Seoul-based pop-rockers and the western guitar bands they admire, who include the Strokes and Kodaline. Any group can punch out a sharp, hooky set, but Day6’s show – only their second UK appearance – positions them as both purveyors of slugging powerpop and watchful older brothers. “We’re here to make you guys feel better,” bassist/rapper Young K tells the lovestruck MyDays, a sentiment echoed by California-bred guitarist Jae, who speaks at length about his own “dark places”, concluding: “Live your own life, you got me?” Unlike most South Korean boybands, Day6 write and play instruments, and seize the chance to show off individually with twiddly solos. But it’s as tousled, scissor-kicking brothers in arms that they excel. With a setlist spanning their nine albums and EPs and a bank of cannons primed to shower confetti, they compress two hours into a ball of energy that makes them naturals for festival bills. It’s immaterial that nearly everything apart from a cover of Ed Sheeran’s Shape of You is sung/rapped in Korean: empathy and “sweet chaos” – a song title that aptly describes this show – carry the day.
Real name Moriah Pereira, Poppy is a YouTube-born character who has been described as both an alien and a cult leader (she has, of course, released a book, The Gospel of Poppy). I Disagree is her third studio album, and it finds the LA-based creator pushing into more eclectic territory than ever – which is saying something, given how her earlier work blended the off-kilter sheen of PC Music with a hyperactive iteration of ska. Self-described as “post-genre”, Poppy channels early Gwen Stefani (replete with the interest in Japanese kawaii, or cuteness) and whispery, dark, glee-club theatrics – think Billie Eilish gone hair metal. It’s a cartoonish record that is at once garish, sweet and over the top, the rollicking candyfloss pop of tracks such as Concrete masking lines about wanting to be buried and turned into a street. Stark contortions are at the album’s centre: shouting, spiky guitars and clashing electro are met with soft, dissonant harmonies (the standout title track is a thrilling distillation of all of the above). Overall, an enjoyable, imaginative and at times uncanny assault on the senses.
There was certainly no shortage of competent and unimaginative indie rock in the late 2010s. But the debut album by the Big Moon – 2017’s Love in the 4th Dimension – swerved a landfill indie fate thanks to the band’s innate tunefulness and the assured songwriting of frontwoman Juliette Jackson. They snagged a Mercury nomination instead. This second outing finds the Big Moon straining at the confines of the guitar band configuration. The first track released from Walking Like We Do – It’s Easy Then – dropped a big clue about the band’s chosen trajectory, with a soaring chorus and a video animation of the song’s central instrument: the piano. Take a Piece, meanwhile, channels 90s pop anthemics without shame. Gnarly guitars have not been excised altogether – the twin attack of Jackson and lead guitarist Soph Nathan survives – but the band’s ambition is audible in the uptick in keyboards, horns, flutes and production values. Jackson, too, has grown more expansive and bittersweet: songs like Dog Eat Dog dissect human motivations with a caustic eye and there is an additional soupcon of Chrissie Hynde to her voice. No one could ever mistake this band for sonic outliers, even when they hit their distortion pedals, but Walking Like We Do sets the Big Moon up for much bigger, more mainstream things.
The British music industry’s focus on the male solo artist at the expense of female musicians has been thrown into sharp relief by the nominations for the 2020 Brit awards, in which only one British woman – and no groups featuring women – was nominated across 25 slots in mixed-gender categories. Pop singer Mabel was nominated for best new artist and best song for Don’t Call Me Up – but the nine other song nominees and four other new artist nominees are solo British males. (US star Miley Cyrus guests on Mark Ronson’s nominated song Nothing Breaks Like a Heart.) All five of the nominees for the top prize, best British album, are solo male artists: Stormzy, Michael Kiwanuka, Lewis Capaldi, Dave and Harry Styles. Of the 193 albums on the longlist for best British album – drawn up from chart successes and record label submissions – which are then voted on by the Brits Academy of music industry figures to create the shortlist, only 35 were by women or female-fronted acts. The Brits’ recognition of musicians of colour is vastly improved following the “BritsSoWhite” criticisms of recent years. More than half of the best album and British male and female nominees are non-white, partly due to the good health of British rap and R&B music this year, but also due to the increased diversity of the Brits Academy in a 2016 shakeup that brought in 700 new members. Those changes also made the gender split of voters almost equal, but the skewed gender balance in this year’s nominations will raise questions about how female British talent is being nurtured. Nominees for best British group – long a bastion for male artists – were also all men: Coldplay, Foals, Bring Me the Horizon, Bastille and the rap duo D-Block Europe. None of those artists received any other nominations, and it’s only the second time in Brits history that no group has been nominated for album of the year, the first time being in 2018. South London rapper Dave, and Scottish singer-songwriter Lewis Capaldi were the most nominated artists, with four each – best album, British male, new artist and song. Each of them had a very successful 2019. Dave won the Mercury prize for his album, Psychodrama, a candid, often bleak exploration of race, poverty, family and mental strife, which topped the UK charts. “What an honour, and what a way to end the most incredible year. I’m very grateful,” he said. His song nomination was for Location, featuring Burna Boy, the Nigerian artist who also picks up a nomination in the best international male category alongside Bruce Springsteen, Dermot Kennedy, Post Malone and Tyler, the Creator. Capaldi topped the charts on both sides of the Atlantic with his power ballad Someone You Loved, nominated in the song category, which was the biggest-selling song of 2019 in the UK (accounting for streams and downloads). His album, Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent, was also the UK’s biggest selling album. Chasing them with three nominations each are Mabel, the daughter of Neneh Cherry who had two Top 10 hits in 2019, and Stormzy, who will be much fancied after a blockbuster year in which he headlined Glastonbury and topped the singles chart three times. The Croydon-raised rapper will be hoping to add a second album of the year award, having previously won in 2018. Harry Styles continues a strong post-One Direction career with two nominations – best album and best British male – with soul singer Michael Kiwanuka also receiving two in the same categories. The best British female category is split between chart-friendly pop – Mabel, balladeer Freya Ridings and R&B star Mahalia – and the more experimental artists Charli XCX and FKA twigs. “It’s really surreal to be nominated for 3 awards this year,” Mabel said. “Third year in a row to be nominated so fingers crossed it’s the 3rd time lucky and I can take one home this year.” Artists who may feel snubbed include Taylor Swift, left out of the international female artist running in favour of Ariana Grande, Billie Eilish, Camila Cabello, Lana Del Rey and Lizzo, and Ed Sheeran, who despite releasing a new album in 2019 earned only one nomination, for his No 1 song with Justin Bieber, I Don’t Care. Liam Gallagher, Rita Ora, Mumford and Sons, the Chemical Brothers, Rod Stewart, the Who, Muse and Emeli Sandé are among the eligible major British artists who didn’t receive any nominations. Awards for best video and best international group have been removed for 2020. Producer of the year will be announced ahead of the awards ceremony; the rising star award for hotly tipped new talent has already been awarded, to soul singer Celeste. The Brit awards, now in their 40th year, take place at London’s O2 Arena on 18 February, and will be screened live on ITV. Comedian Jack Whitehall returns as host for the third year running. The 2020 Brit award nominees in full Group of the year Coldplay Foals Bring Me the Horizon D-Block Europe Bastille Female solo artist Mabel Freya Ridings FKA twigs Charli XCX Mahalia Male solo artist Harry Styles Lewis Capaldi Dave Michael Kiwanuka Stormzy New artist Aitch Lewis Capaldi Dave Mabel Sam Fender Song Ed Sheeran and Justin Bieber – I Don’t Care Mabel – Don’t Call Me Up Calvin Harris and Rag’N’Bone Man – Giant Dave ft Burna Boy – Location Mark Ronson ft Miley Cyrus – Nothing Breaks Like a Heart AJ Tracey – Ladbroke Grove Lewis Capaldi – Someone You Loved Tom Walker – Just You and I Sam Smith and Normani – Dancing With a Stranger Stormzy – Vossi Bop International female solo artist Ariana Grande Billie Eilish Camila Cabello Lana Del Rey Lizzo International male solo artist Bruce Springsteen Burna Boy Tyler, the Creator Dermot Kennedy Post Malone Album of the year Stormzy – Heavy Is the Head Michael Kiwanuka – Kiwanuka Lewis Capaldi – Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent Dave – Psychodrama Harry Styles – Fine Line
You could say this year’s Brit nominations are as predictable as ever. It didn’t take astonishing powers of clairvoyance to predict that Lewis Capaldi would sweep the board – he was a nailed-on certainty from the moment Someone You Loved and its accompanying album Divinely Uninspired to a Hellish Extent became not just the biggest sellers of 2019 in Britain, but also broke America, something that has proved remarkably tricky for UK artists to do in recent years – nor that Stormzy would do well, given his triumphant year. But they’re also predictable in the sense of getting things slightly wrong, something the Brits has proved itself thoroughly adept at throughout its 43-year lifespan. It spent the 80s dutifully doling out gongs to a certain kind of artist – Phil Collins, Dire Straits, Sting – as if the decade’s most important musical developments, hip-hop and acid house, hadn’t actually happened. Top of the Pops, hardly a show at the bleeding edge of the musical leftfield, invariably looked more switched-on. More recently, it spent several years apparently going out of its way to ignore grime, self-evidently the most important and exciting thing around, until artists and viewers started wondering aloud if the awards had an issue with representing black British music. That seemed to have an effect. The last few years’ choices have been more ethnically diverse. This year, it’s women. At the 2019 Brit awards, the 1975 used their acceptance speech for the best British group award to protest against sexism in the music industry, quoting a feature by the Guardian’s Laura Snapes about misogyny. Twelve months later, a grand total of one British female artist has been nominated out of 25 available slots in mixed-gender categories. Brit Award best group winners address misogyny by quoting the Guardian’s Laura Snapes – video Curiously, there’s the sense that the Brits knows there’s a problem here. The longlist nominations came accompanied by a statement that sounded suspiciously like a caveat: “The eligibility list has been compiled by the Official Charts Company and includes artists who have released product and enjoyed top 40 chart success. Record companies have had the opportunity to inform Brit Awards Ltd (BAL) of any eligible artists they wish to be added or inform BAL of any incorrect entries.” In other words: don’t blame us, it’s the record companies who are at fault. They’ve got a point. A quick scan of the biggest-selling singles and albums of 2019 reveals a distinct paucity of British female artists. The leading female Brit award nominee, Mabel, is also the only UK female in the top 10 for her single Don’t Call Me Up. The absence of Dua Lipa’s Don’t Start Now – a global hit – from the best single nominations seems odd. If critical acclaim counted, you could make a case for Charli XCX’s Charli, Little Simz’s Grey Area or FKA twigs’ Magdalene being included in the best album category, but in terms of commercial success – which is ultimately what the Brit awards are about – they’ve sold nothing like the kind of quantities Capaldi or Stormzy have. It’s clear there’s a wider issue here, one that involves the British music industry’s ability or otherwise to sign and develop female artists, to turn them into lasting success stories. It’s clearly not beyond the music industry to do this. After all, it was a British female artist who made the biggest-selling album of the 21st century thus far, 21 by Adele. It just doesn’t seem to happen very often, especially compared with the US, where there are so many big-hitting female artists that the Brit nominations can’t contain them all: Taylor Swift isn’t there, edged out by Lizzo, Lana Del Rey, Billie Eilish, Ariana Grande and Camila Cabello. It’s a subject that you wouldn’t bet against one of the more switched-on winners at the awards ceremony in February addressing in their acceptance speech. Even if they don’t, the Brit nominations seem set to provoke a conversation about it. With the greatest of respect to the nominees, that might be the best thing about them.
This week we’ve got an icky ode to marital sex, further proof Rosalía can do no wrong, and a WTF slice of AI pop Justin Bieber Yummy There’s something about one-time child stars named Justin that makes them incapable of getting married without releasing at least one twee, innuendo-laden track that’s all about boning their wives. Justin Timberlake’s was Strawberry Bubblegum, and Justin Bieber’s is Yummy. It’ll be interesting to see what the teens make of the chorus, which has been precision-engineered for TikTok. Timberlake’s Strawberry Bubblegum came from the album that contained the pristine eight-minute pop epic Mirrors, so let’s hope Bieber’s got one of those up his sleeve too. Travis Scott ft Rosalía and Lil Baby Highest in the Room (Remix) Remember when Travis Scott fell down a hole onstage at a Drake concert? This is nearly as good as that, and that was quite literally the greatest thing ever to be captured on video. A rework of an already-quite-good song that proves the theory that anything can be improved by the addition of Rosalía doing some warbly Spanish. Hailee Steinfeld Wrong Direction Quite a title for a song that was released on the first day of the decade. Jeez, give us a chance, Hailee! Directioners are understandably convinced that this heart-achey piano ballad is about her ex, Niall Horan, and, if so, it doesn’t paint him in a great light. He kicked me off a picnic table in the V festival VIP section in 2012, so I’m prepared to believe his nice-guy act is all a ruse. Baker CarterG and Hatsune Miku Love Memories All the real-music bores who complained about manufactured pop in the 90s should look away now. Hatsune Miku has been quite literally manufactured – she’s nothing more than a bank of voice files, farmed out to songwriters when they don’t want the bother of an actual human singer to deal with. Hence all “her” songs sound a bit like a child singing over a keyboard demo track. Love Memories, with its Pachelbel chord progression and sugary vocals jazzes things up with some machine zaps and kids-TV synths. Is it good? Is it interesting? Not sure, really. Gabrielle Aplin and Nina Nesbitt Miss You 2 A very pleasant song from one-time John Lewis ad singer Gabrielle Aplin and Jess Glynne support act Nina Nesbitt. It’s a remixed version of Aplin’s 2016 song Miss You, which I’m not sure anyone was really clamouring for but there you go – always here for fewer trop-house undertones and more Corrs-y nananas.
The indie quartet are in a bright mood, though Juliette Jackson can be devastatingly sharp on the disappointments of contemporary womanhood The Big Moon Chipper … the Big Moon. Photograph: Pooneh Ghana Endearing indie outfits announcing that they’re going pop is rarely cause for celebration. The sense that they feel strong-armed into it by commercial pressures is generally in inverse proportion to their ability to pull it off. But the Big Moon have actually done it, after a fashion. Since earning a Mercury nomination for their chipper, grungy 2017 debut album, Love in the 4th Dimension, the London four-piece haven’t copied some of their peers’ vain attempts to pay homage to teenage Destiny’s Child obsessions, or to replicate Max Martin’s studio arsenal in their bedrooms. Walking Like We Do vaults back a few more pop generations to the brassy bonhomie, dry wit and shabby music hall charm of acts such as Dexys, or even Elton John at his brightest. Their piano galumphs along, their vocal harmonies are rowdy and imposing yet their quirks are tamed by keen, oddball structures, and a rare balance of enveloping dreaminess and emphatic insistence. At their spikiest, as on Don’t Think or Holy Roller, they can recall the great 2000s indie band the Long Blondes. But there’s nothing kitsch about the Big Moon’s bright and inviting second record – its singles have, pleasingly, found a surprising home on Radio 1, and songwriter and frontwoman Juliette Jackson is a real laureate of how underwhelming contemporary womanhood can feel. She’s a fantastic lyricist, endlessly quotable and often subtly devastating without self-pity or the jarring rawness that characterises comparable US songwriters. “I never saw the tide coming, I only saw the waves,” she sings about an unforeseen breakup on Waves, a wonderfully orderly song that reflects Jackson’s self-delusions. “You had me going for a minute there,” she sings to a deserting paramour, growing more ragged as she realises they’ve actually gone. She mourns her friends on the bittersweet Barcelona, the ones moving away, becoming successful, pursuing grownup lives: “I may be present, but I’m not all here,” she sings of one such funeral for youth. “I’m looking at her baby, picking out her features.” Jackson is empathetic and spirited as she sings about her fears of being left behind. But the Big Moon’s sharp update ensures they won’t be.
Unaccompanied, Galvin brings surprising runs and whiplash sounds from his instrument, recorded at a new Paris museum A virtuosic risk-taker … Elliot Galvin. A virtuosic risk-taker … Elliot Galvin. Photograph: Dave Stapleton Frank Gehry, the 90-year-old American architect behind the spectacular new Fondation Louis Vuitton museum in Paris, quoted jazz sax legend Wayne Shorter’s opinion of rehearsals when asked about his own, improv-inspired working methods: “You can’t practice what you ain’t already invented.” Fittingly, the Fondation brought contemporary jazz under its soaring glass wings in 2018 – this 40-minute set by the distantly Jarrett-like but mostly unclassifiable young English pianist Elliot Galvin (a longtime collaborator with imaginative trumpeter/composer Laura Jurd) was recorded during that year’s solo jazz piano series at the venue. Live in Paris is more sonically austere than Galvin’s trio albums (there are no electronics or DIY instruments), but it still rings and rattles with the outpourings of a mercurial mind. The opening As Above suggests snatches of Keith Jarrett’s 2005 all-improv Carnegie Hall gig in its racing, keyboard-length descents and ascents, punctuated by rhythmic jolts and glimpses of songlike themes in the music’s margins. Time and Everything begins with brittle under-the-lid string-pluckings, but ends on an almost jaunty groove. For JS is a baroque-like exercise in long, undulating lines and graceful counterpoint, eventually spurring a walking left hand and a jaggedly jazzy feel. The haunting Broken Windows has a folksong’s lilt, So Below hurls together Cecil Tayloresque free-jazzy maelstroms, percussive whiplash sounds and bass-chord bangs. You don’t expect happy-clappy tunes and signalled payoffs from such a virtuosic, risk-embracing one-off as Galvin, but the tough art of unaccompanied piano improvising has gained a powerful new recruit, on this evidence.
9 January 1980: The flashest punks going tone down the frenzy but keep the excitement, adding a new tunefulness and lightness of touch The Clash on stage, circa 1978. The Clash on stage, circa 1978. Photograph: Lynn Goldsmith/Corbis/VCG via Getty Images The Clash’s London Calling (CBS CLASH 3) is a low-priced uneven double album that contains some excellent songs, a lot of good-natured fun, and very few dull moments among its 18 tracks. It is a massive improvement on Give ‘Em Enough Rope, which I hated for its pretension, and their stage shows of early last year, which I hated for their amateurism. The flashest punks going can now almost justify their claim to write “modern folk songs.” They have toned down the punk frenzy but kept the excitement, and added a new tunefulness and lightness of touch, as well as the ability to deal with R&B roots alongside their long-term fascination with reggae. And Joe Strummer can now actually sing, which once seemed about as likely as him voting Conservative. The songs are varied; the best are scattered across the four sides in no particular order. The most successful, at the start of side two, is Spanish Bombs, a stirring piece that deals with the recent history of Spain, the memories of Lorca and the ‘39 war, seen from the apparently precarious perspective of flying in to the Costa Brava on a DC10. And if that sounds pretentious, I can only say it is a jumbled set of evocative images that really works well. Elsewhere, there is Lost in the Supermarket, a mellow but bitter piece about alienation (“I came here for a special offer, guaranteed personality”); the chugging and fatalistic Death or Glory; a trendy piece of ska fun with Rudie Can’t Fail; and bursts of revivalism with Brand New Cadillac and Wrong ‘Em Boyo, which drifts from Staggerlee into reggae. The production by Guy Stevens is appropriately light but rough at the edges, and the introduction of Micky Gallagher’s keyboards brings out the melodies The Clash were always good at writing, but not so good at performing.
Two new David Bowie records will be released this year, with a digital EP featuring unheard versions of songs being released weekly and a live session, which will be out on Record Store Day in April. The first track from the David Bowie Is It Any Wonder? EP, The Man Who Sold The World, was released on Wednesday to mark what would have been the singer’s 73rd birthday, with a new song released each week digitally. The ChangesNowBowie live session, recorded in 1996 during rehearsals for Bowie’s 50th birthday concert at Madison Square Garden, comes later in the year and was previously broadcast on Radio 1 by Mary Anne Hobbs. Tracklistings are not available for either recording, although Parlophone Records said the Is It Any Wonder? EP will feature unreleased versions of songs from Bowie’s back catalogue which were recorded by him in the 1990s. Both the EPs, titled David Bowie Is It Any Wonder?, and ChangesNowBowie, are released by Parlophone Records and are part of a lucrative posthumous career for the singer. Shortly after Bowie’s death in 2016 sales of his albums in the US rose by more than 5,000%, according to Nielsen Music, with 682,000 units sold in the week he died. Spotify said that streaming levels of his music increased 2,700% in the hours after his death. But according to the people behind some of the most respected reissues, posthumous albums have evolved from being quick money-spinners for record labels to painstaking “labours of love” that bring forgotten musicians, including those Bowie admired, to a new audience. Audika Records was set up by the former Tommy Boy record executive Steve Knutson, who used his own money to create a label that would put out music by the cult musician Arthur Russell, who Bowie was a fan of. “I did it for selfish reasons,” said Knutson, who was invited to look through Russell’s vast archive. “I needed to hear this music and the only way it was going to happen was if I put it out myself.” In cooperation with Russell’s partner, Tom Lee – who was given the rights to Russell’s music – Knutson began to build the legacy of Russell, who was little known beyond the New York underground scene until Audika began issuing albums, beginning in 2004 with Calling Out Of Context. The 15th Russell release on Audika, Iowa Dreams, was released in November 2019. Josh Cheon, the founder of the music label Dark Entries Records in San Francisco, had a similar experience with the disco producer Patrick Cowley, who is best known for his track You Make Me Feel Mighty Real with Sylvester, and who died in 1982. When a former business partner of Cowley’s invited him to come and select records from his collection, Cheon and his DJing partners decided to take everything Cowley related, including several hours of unreleased music, on reel-to-reel tapes. Cheon would eventually hunt down two porn soundtracks, which Cowley had made and released them on Dark Entries, along with detailed liner notes. The latest release, Mechanical Fantasy Box, is a collection of early works from 1973 to 1980. “We are the guardians and the custodians of these people’s music. We’re in charge of what the world gets to hear,” said Cheon. There is little data on posthumous releases and no official statistics have been compiled to measure their rise, but, since the 1960s, albums released after an artist’s death have proved to be incredibly popular among consumers. After Redding’s Dock Of The Bay became the first album to become a posthumous No 1, artists from Jimi Hendrix to John Lennon, Janis Joplin and the Notorious BIG all went to No 1s after their deaths. That popularity has led to a lucrative posthumous industry with estate management, rights disputes and hologram tours becoming the norm. But the handling of an artist’s legacy can be highly contentious. Prince’s estate has fought planned releases of the artist’s unreleased recordings since his death in 2016, and when Whitney Houston died in February 2012, Sony Music briefly raised the cost of her greatest hits on iTunes UK from £4.99 to £7.99 before reducing it after criticism. Any hint of cynical profiteering is anathema to the indy labels. Matt Sullivan, who runs Light in the Attic Records, and Matt Werth, who founded the label RVNG Intl, say posthumous releases for unknown artists are a labour of love. “It’s really not a case of just turning up and getting someone to sign on the dotted line,” said Sullivan. “We’ve been working on one release for more than a decade now”. David Bowie’s releases are most straightforward, with the singer’s estate owning the rights to his music, which are then licensed to Parlophone. No further releases have been announced for 2020, though there has been a Bowie boxset released every autumn for the last four years. Since his death there have been six live albums releases, including Serious Moonlight (Live 83), Live in Berlin (1978) and the 2018 Glastonbury 2000 that recorded his headlining performance at the Somerset festival.
Pop and rock music, in its multifarious forms, seems to shift faster than ever. In 2020, we’re bombarded not just with music – more of which is readily available to everyone than at any point in history – but an unrelenting barrage of the stuff that goes along with music: visuals, scenes, theories, arguments, counter-arguments and controversies both real and manufactured. It can feel overwhelming, impossible for even the most plugged-in, social media-literate listener to keep up with. No matter how much of the waterfront you try to cover, it’s hard to rid yourself of the nagging sensation that you might have missed out on something. That’s as true of us in the music media as it is of any other listener. The idea behind the Guardian’s new monthly Musical Notes column is to collect a miscellany of smaller ideas, thoughts, experiences and trends about music: stuff that’s interesting, striking or telling, but doesn’t necessarily fit within the Guardian’s standard feature, review or news formats. I’ll be contributing each month along with music editors Ben Beaumont-Thomas and Laura Snapes – but we also want to include you, too. Share your thoughts, ideas and experiences about any genre of music each month in the comments section – be it a song or gig you’ve loved, a trend you’ve spotted, or indeed anything musical that piqued your interest – and we’ll publish a selection of them in the following month’s column. For now, here’s Ben and Laura to kick off the series with what they’ve been reflecting on in the first week of 2020. Alexis Petridis Justin Bieber’s TikTok turn Justin Bieber’s previous album, 2015’s Purpose, was a triumphant third act: not only did it draw a line under years of juvenile delinquency (drugs, racist jokes, negligence to a pet monkey), it did so with the best songs of his career: the earnest and feathery reggaeton of Sorry, the beautiful trop-house of What Do You Mean, and Where Are Ü Now with its weird, faraway “dolphin flute”. After finding God and getting married, the stage is now set for the next Bieber story, and its opening chapter is a song called Yummy. Released last week, there are some things to like about it – the way the melody bounces up into the lovely, yearning upper range of his voice; the opalescent chords – but there are plenty more to hate. The shameless plug for his streetwear brand Drew House; the cringeworthy use of trap ebonics (“hundred racks … get litty babe”); the sense of him being about two years behind the curve of hazy R&B, a real shame when Purpose was so trendsetting. But most of all, that chorus, which sounds like a Lonely Island parody of a pop-R&B song. Its use of baby talk to vaguely gesture at a world of sexual pleasure will make your genitals involuntarily fold up inside your abdomen. More troubling than the vision of he and his wife cooing this at each other is the feeling that this has been written for one thing in mind: TikTok. Bieber joined the lipsyncing social network on the day of Yummy’s release, and its chorus seems designed purely for Gen Z-ers in yoga pants to spoon frozen acai into their mouths while miming along to the word “yummy”. Hit songs such as Regard’s Ride It, Ashnikko’s Stupid, and Arizona Zervas’s Roxanne have all recently got a boost from going viral in TikTok dance or mime videos, and this is what Bieber is trying to leverage – but the crucial difference is those tracks are, respectively, more danceable, witty and tuneful. The deeper problem is that a generation grown on highly sophisticated, multilayered internet culture can detect bullshit a mile off: this is so nakedly eager to go viral that it almost certainly won’t. Yummy will probably reach No 1 off Bieber’s sheer star power anyway. He doesn’t need the TikTok virality, but craves its pop-cultural relevance – and that desperation chafes awkwardly against the spiritually grounded marital bliss of his current image. Ben Beaumont-Thomas RiP to my iPod I hated iPods. Certain kids at school had them the moment they were released in 2001, storing the pitiful four albums they owned on an expensive device designed to hold 1,000 songs. I was 12 and already fancied myself a serious music fan: I had at least, like, 20 albums. iPods, it was obvious, were for posers. Once I got a Saturday job, I saved up for a hardy brick called an iRiver that also held photos and a radio tuner, and wheezed like a geriatric mouse when I laboriously clicked through a music collection largely comprising Tegan and Sara bootlegs downloaded via a dial-up modem. My insistence that it was clearly the better MP3 player was undermined by the fact that absolutely nobody else had one. As my iRiver struggled on, the iPod got sleeker, and its capacity considerably bigger. In 2007, Apple introduced a 160GB Classic model. I could no longer resist. (Plus I had left school so there was no risk of anyone saying “I told you so”.) I loved it like a pet, updating it and labelling my iTunes library obsessively. I have fond, tragic memories of listening to Mogwai’s Young Team on it as I traipsed through the rain to read Kafka in a Starbucks during my first year of university; listening to the National and feeling sorry for myself alone on a Friday night in my grotty first London house share. More happily, I took it around the world, and the increasingly scratched iPod seemed to grow with me: any time I scrolled to see if an artist I wanted to discover was on there, somehow they always were. (The reality was thanks to a uni friend letting me copy her extensive and largely pirated music library.) As the 2010s wore on, my iPod’s packed 160GB capacity was no match for the infinite library of Spotify, which I initially tried to use only to research old albums for work. Apple retired the iPod Classic, then they nuked the headphone jack from their phones. As carrying an iPod with its wired headphones and MP3 dependence became more anachronistic, I clung to it, particularly as a form of resistance against distraction – iPod Classics don’t connect to wifi or contain apps, or stop playing when a marketer calls you. That mine still worked – albeit now very dented and prone to pausing at the faintest jolt – felt vaguely meaningful. But gradually, I succumbed to Spotify creep. I got into exercise, where carrying one device, a phone, is easier than two, and wireless headphones help. (Better still if that device contains Twitter for distraction from squats.) I got into podcasts, which live on my phone. When I got an office job and started commuting, I found that my iPod and wired headphones stayed in my bag as I switched from NPR’s Fresh Air to Spotify, or the brilliant Bandcamp app, to soundtrack my train reading. I got a phone with more space and (embarrassingly) finally figured out how to put MP3s on it. As of 2020, I’ve stopped carrying my iPod around. I feel so guilty at seeing it on the shelf, that I abandoned it before it died. It’s so feeble to think that the lightest grazes of friction pushed me away from my beloved little music machine. Though maybe it’s more than just convenience. Fifteen years ago, it seemed so thrilling to have thousands of songs in your pocket, the world at your fingertips. With time, I’ve understood that all that access generally amounts to a lot of dabbling and not much commitment. Obviously, Spotify offers the same possibility, but I keep a judicious eye on the albums I save to it, discarding duds and eventually purchasing the good ones while MP3s still exist. My iTunes library is still intact, an MP3 monolith built on varying degrees of legitimacy that I can pluck from at any time. (You want an illicit recording of the National playing a French radio session in 2006? I got you.) I don’t want to carry it around in my pocket any more, but the slippery way that streaming companies seduce consumers into abandoning their libraries, and the equally slippery way that songs can then vanish from the world’s library (whether the internet or actual, physical warehouses) makes holding on to them, whatever the device, feel like a meaningful form of resistance.
It took the Doors’ drummer, John Densmore, three years to visit the grave of his bandmate Jim Morrison after he was found dead in a Paris bathtub in 1971. He didn’t even go to the funeral. “Did I hate Jim?” Densmore pauses, although he is not obviously alarmed by the question. “No. I hated his self-destruction … He was a kamikaze who went out at 27 – what can I say?” Quite a lot, it transpires. Morrison was a man who was spectacularly good at being a rock star – a lithe figure in leather trousers, prophesying about death, sex and magic on some of the biggest hits of the 1960s – Light My Fire, Break on Through and Hello, I Love You. But he was catastrophically bad at the rest of life. Like many alcoholics, he could be reckless, selfish and mercurial. “The Dionysian madman,” Densmore has called him – a “psychopath”, a “lunatic” and “the voice that struck terror in me”. He had lobbied to get Morrison off the road before his death, and even quit the band at one point. “Some people wanted to keep shovelling coal in the engine and I was like: ‘Wait a minute. So what if we have one less album? Maybe he’ll live?’” Why did he carry on? “Because I wasn’t mature enough to say that at the time. I wasn’t trying to enable him. It was another era. I used to answer the question: ‘If Jim was around today, would he be clean and sober?’ with a ‘no’. Kamikaze drunk. Now I’ve changed my mind. Of course he would be sober. Why wouldn’t he be? He was smart.” Densmore, 75, is a defiant survivor of the music scene he helped build. This, perhaps, is why, in the decades since Morrison’s death, he has become not only one of the great chroniclers of the Doors, but the fiercest protector of Morrison’s legacy. To anyone who has read Densmore’s 1990 memoir – a book he says was “written in blood” – this may come as a surprise; later the book would form the basis for Oliver Stone’s (dreadful) Doors biopic. “It took me years to forgive Jim,” Densmore says. “And now I miss him so much for his artistry.” Next month, a documentary about another of his bandmates, the keyboardist Ray Manzarek, who died in 2013, will be released. Manzarek’s relationship with Densmore was not smooth either. From the early 2000s, they were embroiled in a vicious six-year legal battle in which Densmore tried to stop Manzarek and the band’s guitarist, Robby Krieger, from touring under the Doors name as well as selling the band’s music for use on a Cadillac commercial. “I know. I sued my bandmates – am I CRAZY?!” he yells. People certainly thought he was. It is not usual to spend years in court trying to stop yourself from earning millions of dollars to prove a point about the value of artistic integrity over the pursuit of money. “What can I say? Jim’s ghost is behind me all the time,” Densmore says. “My knees were shaking pretty strong when they upped the offer of $5m (£3.8m) to $15m. But my head was saying: Break on Through for a gas-guzzling SUV? No!” Manzarek and Krieger’s lawyers tried to paint Densmore as a dangerous communist – even citing a piece he wrote that was published in the Guardian as evidence for this – but eventually, and spectacularly, he won. He wrote a book about the case, published in 2013, and donated the profits to the Occupy movement. “Money is like fertiliser,” he says. “When spread around, things grow; when it’s hoarded, it stinks.” Densmore is fluent in the language of the 60s elder: on the one hand, he talks of peace rainbows and pots of gold filled with love, despairing at the rise of “separatists and populists and borderline racists” running the US. On the other, he displays an almost chilling pragmatism about life and death, not uncommon among musicians of his generation, who lost so many friends to the era’s excesses. “I interviewed Tom Petty a few months before he died,” he says quietly when I bring this up. The pair became friends during the court case – Petty’s song Money Becomes King, about a singer he once idolised who was selling his songs for a light beer advert, struck home with Densmore. “He had trouble with his hip. I guess he was taking painkillers and brown powder, too. Damn it …” he breathes deeply. “I just ache losing him.” He pauses. “Maybe it’s more noble to die in a friggin’ hospital with a bunch of tubes up your arm. I mean, it sounds horrible, but at least you rode the train all the way to the end – you never checked out early.” Densmore grew up in the west LA suburbs. He was a gifted drummer from an early age, starting out in the high school marching band (an activity that in those days “ranked next to having leprosy” he once wrote). College put him on to jazz, and he worshipped at the altar of Coltrane and Davis. He was 21 when he met Morrison, who was tall, bookish and handsome. “I’m not into guys, but he looked like Michelangelo’s David,” he says. They had met through Manzarek, a friend of Morrison’s from UCLA film school, at a transcendental meditation workshop run by the guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. He took up meditation, he says, because he couldn’t take acid all the time and liked the “separate reality” meditation offered. “When we took LSD, it was legal. We were street scientists exploring the mind. I experimented with cocaine during the 70s and 80s. But it wasn’t my drug of choice. Ugh … drug. I hate that word. I was shocked when heroin became popular. Even Jim knew heroin was a serious drug. Heroin tried to make you forget everything. It scared me. So I stayed away.” Compared with his bandmates, Densmore was a square. He wasn’t the film-school/literary type. He couldn’t understand Morrison’s obsession with Nietzsche (“Why would anyone want to read a whole book of such double talk?” he wrote); when Manzarek suggested he watch the François Truffaut film The 400 Blows, he ran out and got it, thinking it was The 400 Blowjobs. “Adolescence!” he laughs. At times, he was envious of the attention Morrison got – particularly from women. “Sure, I was jealous. I’d been a teenage drummer with acne. I remember thinking: ‘Why is Jim’s face so big?’ on the cover of our first album, The Doors. Probably because it wouldn’t have sold a lot of copies if it were my face!” While he may not have been the centrepiece of the group, there is no doubt Densmore was pivotal to the band’s sound. It is hard to imagine Break on Through without his shimmying bossa nova rhythm, or LA Woman – a song that pulses with the hum of a hot California night – without the cascading drum break that makes way for Morrison’s growls of “MR MOJO RISIN’”. But as he toured the world with the Doors, Densmore’s family life became more unsteady. His brother had several stints in a psychiatric hospital. He describes going to visit him, finding him heavily sedated, and wondering how sleeping for 17 hours a day could possibly help his schizophrenia – a point that will be familiar even now to anyone who has had to endure acute mental illness. His brother killed himself in 1978. He was also called Jim; he also died at the age of 27. Densmore later wrote that he struggled handling sharp objects after his brother’s suicide. “I thought that if I did it, too, it would somehow make it better – atone for not saving him.” “My sister got angry at me for writing about it,” he says. “For revealing the family secret. Our brother killed himself and back then it wasn’t talked about. And I apologised. I said I was sorry. I said: ‘I know it hurts, but I also want you to read these letters I’ve got from fans who say they wanted to commit suicide and didn’t because of this book.’ And that’s why it’s there. Because, as difficult as it is, it’s healing to get this stuff out on the table.” Densmore made more music after the Doors split in 1973, and then turned his hand to acting and dance. But it was grief, it is clear, that drove him to the written word. “It’s funny. I got Cs in English at school. I hated it. But now I want to be a writer and I’m voracious for new vocabulary and new ideas. I like connecting new synapses. Like Jim Morrison did. I do sort of feel as if I’m channelling his passion for life.” He stops. “Actually, not for life – as I said, he was a kamikaze who went out at 27. But I want to set an example.” Densmore’s writing about Morrison often reads as if it were done by someone who has survived an abusive relationship, such was the terror he felt around Morrison towards the end. “On the outside, Jim seemed normal,” he wrote. “But he had an aggressiveness toward life and women.” One such incident was early in their friendship when he went to pick Morrison up from a woman’s house and found him brandishing a knife at her while holding her hand behind her back. At the time, Densmore did nothing because he was worried that if anyone found out about Morrison, the band – and his own career – would be over. What does he make of this now? “I was really young,” he says. “I couldn’t figure out whether they were lovers, friends or enemies. I just felt like I needed to get out of there.” Would he have acted differently if it happened today? “Yeah, I would say: ‘What the fuck are you guys doing? Please take it down a few notches here.’” There is also an anecdote in his memoir, one that makes it into the Stone film, too, in which Morrison’s partner Pamela Courson is brought into the vocal booth and asked to perform oral sex on the singer while he is recording the track Lost Little Girl. “Urgh,” he groans, when I bring it up. How does it make him feel? “Not so good. I mean, I don’t think he … Well, yeah … See, I’m at a loss for words. SEXIST, what can I say?” How did it feel at the time, when the whole band was there, seeing it happen from afar? “Well, you know, it didn’t really happen. They were just sort of kissing, and then she left.” So it didn’t happen? “No.” That’s odd, I say, because Stone creates a scene out of it in his film. “Oh, my goodness. Well, you know, Hollywood movies are an impressionistic painting of the truth,” he says. Later in the interview, we go back to this point. “I’m a little nervous that I’ve said stupid things,” he says. “But life is messy.” It is true – if you have lived as many lives as Densmore, seen generations change and shift, there is no doubt that what was acceptable 50 years ago is no longer so. Densmore’s next book will be about his meetings with musicians. “Each chapter is about a different artist who has fed me artistically,” he says. It will go from his time learning to play the tabla with Ravi Shankar to his adoration for Patti Smith to the time he met Bob Marley. “Writing is a little easier on a 75-year-old,” he says. “I gotta pace myself. No disrespect to Jim and his 27 years, but I’ve been in it for the long run.” He will also get married this year “for the hundredth time” (it is his fourth time), to his partner of 13 years, the painter and photographer Ildiko Von Somogyi. “I guess I believe in the institution,” he laughs. He is proud he has found another career after music. “You want to have a bunch of lives,” he says. “And life does go on – if you stay vital.”
About a year ago, Cher Lloyd was shopping in the Disney Store on Oxford Street when she was approached by a new fan: a middle-aged man who told her that he had seen her recent appearance on Loose Women. “He went: ‘I just want to say, you’re nothing like I thought you were gonna be like – you’re not horrible at all,’” Lloyd remembers. “My heart sank.” The experience has stayed with her as an example of the “heartbreaking” perception of her in the UK – not that she has ever been allowed to forget it. Nearly a decade has passed since her barnstorming X Factor audition of Soulja Boy and Keri Hilson’s Turn My Swag On, still hailed by many as a touchstone in the show’s history. Back then, Simon Cowell’s eyes lit up at her potential: a promising singer, with an unapologetic presence that made for unmissable reality TV. Neither the judges nor the public could believe the brass of this Cher from Malvern, Worcestershire, who appeared convincingly older than her 16 years, “in a pair of homemade ripped jeans, hair up in a crazy bun, crazy eyebrows”, as she remembers it now. Perched on the sofa of her PR’s home in north London, swimming in an outsized orange hoodie and Doc Martens with jeans, Lloyd seems younger than she did then, softer – defences not exactly down, but softened by a disarming humour. The eyebrows are looking great, I say. “Thanks,” she deadpans. “Me and my eyebrows have gone on a journey – a transformation. We are better now.” The steel returns to her voice. “But truly, if you can imagine the shit that I got, just for my eyebrows. Would you go up to a 16-year-old girl in the street and say: ‘I don’t know you, but you look disgusting, with your disgusting eyebrows’? That’s what people did to me.” Lloyd is now 26, with a young family and a third album, finally, on the way – yet, still, she is being called on to explain her teenage self. From 2010 she was portrayed, obliquely on The X Factor and explicitly by the media, either as a stroppy diva and desperate copycat of her mentor Cheryl Cole, or as a fragile little girl, struggling with the spotlight. “I’m not going to lie; at the time I was very hormonal, a naughty teenager,” says Lloyd now. “I wanted so desperately to be heard for who I was, and didn’t understand why now a million people had something to say about me.” She hadn’t yet learned how to express herself, she says. And it was as if only the footage in which she came across poorly – inarticulate or frustrated – was the footage that got used. She felt her walls come up. “I had no control over how I was being edited. I think that affects me to this day – like, I’m always just a bit touchy about what I say.” She eyes my voice recorder. “Is it going to be spun in a certain way to make me sound like an asshole?” Revisiting the X Factor footage and coverage today, it seems to show an unhappy young girl, trapped in a lose-lose situation. Just weeks into the competition, tonsillitis terminated her performance of Mike Posner’s Cooler Than Me, twice. “Oh, that fiasco,” she says, rolling her eyes. She has learned to laugh about it, she says – as well as the dress she wore: a short, frilly red number. “Hideous! I got it off Asos on sale for like, six quid. I remember thinking: ‘I look the nuts.’” After a series of idiosyncratic, hip-hop-influenced mash-ups and powerful vocal performances, Lloyd was among the bookies’ favourites to win the competition, but the public turned on her when she progressed at the expense of Gamu Nhengu and Mary Byrne. At a press conference shortly before the final, she was asked about the “growing, hate-filled online campaign” against her. “I didn’t know there was a hate campaign,” she responded, tearful and taken aback. For all the swagger of her audition, she says she was a “naive young girl” who had never even been to London before. “On the Friday, I was a normal 16-year-old girl. On the Saturday – I’ve just woken up, and apparently now I’m a celebrity? I don’t think anything could have prepared a 16-year-old to be able to deal with those pressures.” Malvern – where Lloyd grew up and spends much of her time – is the sort of small town where the local shopkeeper knows everybody’s regular buys, says Lloyd (Cherry Coke and a pack of Doritos in her case). She was the eldest of four, a protective big sister who would “have something to say” about any bullying of her siblings. Their mother is a Romani Gypsy, and the first year of Lloyd’s life was spent travelling in a caravan; she later lived on a council estate. Her family “went through certain times when there was judgment,” she says. “For the Gypsy community, there’s definitely still a stigma.” That was perhaps even more pronounced 10 years ago, when the term “chavs” was in common parlance and there was little positive working-class representation in the media. A popular Facebook page dubbed Lloyd “the Primark Cheryl Cole”; when My Big Fat Gypsy Wedding aired on Channel 4, she was made the butt of jokes on social media. Scrutiny of her family peaked about halfway through The X Factor, when her uncle died from a methadone overdose. (The coroner accepted that Edward Smith had been “deceived” into taking the drug, recording an open verdict.) Lloyd did not attend the funeral for fear of attracting the paparazzi, and gave a tearful performance on the show of Stay by Shakespears Sister – regarded as one of her best. “I love that song, and that performance was great, but I was grieving and I didn’t know how to cope,” she says. Lloyd remembers being taken earlier in the competition, along with the other contestants, to talk to two mental health professionals about how she was coping – but she still felt unsupported and sometimes exploited. “I look back on it and I think, God, that put me in such a position.” Even now she feels guilty that she missed the service. “The headlines would have been: ‘Big Fat Gypsy Funeral.’ I know I’m right – I’ve been around long enough. I know what people want from me.” When Lloyd eventually came fourth with the fewest public votes, the Mail cast her as the “ungrateful X Factor failure”. Far from making her career as a musician, the “reality-TV baggage” nearly scuppered it. “What baffles me is that they created a character but then, after the show, expected me to be a fully fledged, respected artist. I had to do damage control. And still, at 26 years old, I have to do damage control. Years later, I do have some anger towards people for doing that to me.” She chuckles. “I definitely don’t say hello and shake hands with certain people.” She even refuses to perform Swagger Jagger, her first single post-X Factor and a UK No 1, because it reminds her of her “angry, afraid” teenage self: “I look back and I think it’s a sad song.” Yet she is hopeful that audiences are now more aware of the way reality TV can turn participants into caricatures, and – after the suicide of a former Jeremy Kyle guest – of the stakes involved. “That awareness will continue, hopefully – where people think: ‘D’you know what, I don’t want to have any involvement in this process of destroying another person.’” Lloyd herself was able to start afresh in the US, where she relocated in 2012 after Want U Back peaked at No 9 on the Billboard pop chart. That December, she performed at Madison Square Garden, the moment she says she felt furthest away from the council estate she grew up on – “like being on another planet”, she says, dreamily. It was the best time in her life to date. In the US, “it wasn’t ‘Cher Lloyd, the Gypsy chav, blah blah blah’. It’s literally, ‘Singer-songwriter Cher Lloyd goes on the Today Show’.” Word of her success made its way back across the Atlantic, too: “There’s definitely a lot of pride when your own country is supportive of you doing well somewhere else.” By then Lloyd had started seeing Craig Monk, a hairdresser she had first laid eyes on at a “swanky” Mayfair salon; they married in 2013. She credits him with keeping her humble at the height of her success, even though being a wife at 20 (not unusual within Traveller families, she notes) shut her off from some professional opportunities. “There was this thing of, ‘If she’s married, she’s off the market,’ and that angle’s taken away from being able to sell my music.” There have been other comments. “‘If you were to wear slightly more slinky clothes, if you wore your skirt a little shorter, maybe you’d get a bit more recognition’ – yeah, that happened.” It was even suggested that being romantically linked to another celebrity would help her career. “‘If you go to this club, bump into somebody and hook up with them, that would be a great way to kick off the next single.’ I can’t even count how many times I’ve seen a hook-up for the sake of a boost of a single.” Lloyd makes fun of me for being shocked. “It’s the joys of being a female in the music industry,” she says, drily. When her second album, Sorry I’m Late, peaked at No 12 on the Billboard 200 in 2014, Lloyd felt it had not been sufficiently pushed by Epic Records, and left the label. It was another daunting new start. But this time, she felt in charge. Lloyd spent her break from the industry in the studio, trying to land on a new sound; doing up a house in Essex to sell on (“Really fun. Very stressful”); and becoming a mother. Her daughter was born in May 2018. That October she released her comeback single, None of My Business, to positive reviews, and a year later came M.I.A. – a slick, smart pop song and the lead single from her third album. Lloyd was determined, she says, not to give in to the fear that motherhood would halt her career. “Two weeks after I had the baby, I went back into meetings and took the baby with me.” Six weeks later, she had a photoshoot. On her recent tour of regional radio, a “running theme” was faux-concern about “balancing” motherhood and music. “Of course I can do both,” she says with disdain. “There are thousands of women across the country who do really tough jobs – and they balance motherhood as well.” Monk and her family in Malvern (where she intends to buy a house) make it possible. When I ask Lloyd if she is a feminist, she looks at me and mimes “duh”. A lot of celebrities shy from the label, I say, suitably chastened. “If I was a bloke, d’you think they would have asked me if I was able to make it on tour? Hmm? Can my husband not look after the baby?” Lloyd is so laser-focused in her interrogation that all I can say, meekly, is: “Yes, Cher, I agree.” Before she had her baby, she says, she was in talks for a big promotional opportunity which fell through. “The comment that I got back was: ‘It could be seen negatively, her coming back so soon after having a baby.’ I remember thinking: ‘Wow, OK, so I can’t decide when my body is ready, when my baby’s ready?’ I remember being blown away by that … a career opportunity that I didn’t get because of becoming a mother. But it’s not stopped me,” she adds. It’s hard to know what would. As she sets out on this latest stage of her career she is hopeful she is allowed to move on from her past. A recent interview referred to her as “the most hated teen in Britain”, she says, with something between incredulity and frustration. “I’m mother to a little girl. I’ve released two albums and I’ve got a top 10 hit in America. I’m not ‘the most hated teen’, I’m 26 years old! We’ve moved on!” Interviewers will still put to her comments she made then, too, “in the hopes of triggering a certain reaction”, she says. What remark is it that they keep trying to hold her to? “I can’t even mention it, because you know what would happen – that will be the headline.” She raises those perfect eyebrows, taps her temple. “Nine years on, I’ve grown smarter.” • You can hear Cher Lloyd’s new songs None of My Business and M.I.A. on Spotify and Apple Music
No, Sue Grainger (Letters, 6 January), the Ian Anderson who wrote about the lack of British folk music in the new music list for 2020 wasn’t the one who was in Jethro Tull. It was the Ian Anderson who deserves our thanks for editing and producing the excellent Folk Roots magazine (latterly fRoots) which sadly closed last year after 40 years. Without Mr Anderson’s efforts many of us would not have become as enthusiastic about world and folk music or, as he called it, “local music from out there”. Toby Wood Peterborough, Cambridgeshire • Folk music “living in the past”? What rot. The songs of Robb Johnson, Leon Rosselson, Steve White, Grace Petrie, Joe Solo, Jim Woodland and many others have more to say about present-day social and political issues than anything in the charts. Graham Larkbey London • I was intrigued by Emma Brockes’ piece on true crime in New York (Crime apps: the latest way to fuel our anger and fear, Journal, 7 January), especially by the report that “a man with no pants on was wandering around the corner of 34th Street and 5th Avenue”. But was she writing in American English or British English – and, if the latter, how would one ever know? Dr Richard Carter Putney, London • John Gooder’s last car at age 74 (Letters, 6 January)? That was my husband’s age when we gave up our car and took to our bicycles for our transport needs. We spent many holidays touring on various National Cycle Network routes – wonderful! Phyll Hardie Thorpe St Andrew, Norwich • Singing may be the answer to many things (Letters, 6 January). What does someone desperate to join a choir but unable to sing in tune do instead? Even Gareth Malone would not be able to help me.
The floor rumbles as more than 2,000 people stamp their feet, raise their arms and bow down in unison as they chant the name “Lizzo”. I find myself with one hand in the air, palm facing the skies and my eyes closed in devotion asking myself, is Lizzo the messiah we need? And if her message of self-love and acceptance is true, is Lizzo the messiah we deserve? There is something radical that, in Australia in such a time of tragedy, distrust and uncertainty, it was at the Sydney Opera House – a building inspired by the cliffs and sails of the harbour, a building that at times reminds me of the tall ships, a building built on stolen land – that a grieving community found hope, joy and comfort in a big Brown woman. After starting the show with the self-love anthem, Good as Hell, Lizzo’s first words to the audience are by way of a simple introduction and then a decree: this space tonight is “inclusive” and “fun”. “There is no room for shame!” Nothing about Lizzo is apolitical. Her art has perspective. Her music is her opinion. Lizzo is someone with something to say. Lizzo is undeniably, objectively good. Even white male critics think so and they’re totally neutral and objective. Just ask them. So I’m gonna toss neutrality to the wind and indulge in my confirmation bias. I’m a Lizzbian. I had a Lizzo-themed bachelorette night. I’m a fat woman of colour. I’m Lizzo’s people. But Lizzo isn’t just good. Lizzo is great. Lizzo is a change-maker. Lizzo is a giver of life. She’s Aphrodite 2020. She’s Julie Andrews on top of the mountains in the Sound of Music. Lizzo doesn’t just speak to me; her body looks like mine and that’s something I’ve never seen in the public sphere before her. It’s fat. It’s a big belly and thighs that touch but most of all, it’s beautiful and celebrated. Lizzo’s politics are what make her spectacular. Her gift is in her generous subjectivity and honest and unabashed specificity. In her, we see ourselves, who we want to be, and who we can be. From the beginning of the Sydney Opera House show, she acknowledges the bushfire tragedy that Australia is experiencing. She offers compassion and sorrow for the circumstances of our community at the time of her visit and that donation buckets will be passed around outside. Her job, she says, is to reflect the times. “That is what artists do: speak up for the people.” And it is this that makes the night not just spectacular but cathartic, like a really intersectional group therapy – with twerking. Lizzo performed all the hits that have become anthems and pop culture sensations – Truth Hurts, Juice, Tempo, Boys, Soul Mate – but they seemed to take on a bigger meaning that night. Her songs of unapologetic self-love and empowerment, usually told through a prism of personal journeys, became songs of solidarity and community. Lizzo isn’t just what I needed, Lizzo is something we all needed. Beginning the ballad, Jerome, about “that person who gave you hell, didn’t appreciate you, didn’t love you”, I can’t help but think about the leaders of this country. Of their silence, their absence and their lack of compassion as this country faces a natural disaster. Jerome became a ballad about the failure of the patriarchy, of the so-called leaders, of the rich, of corporations, who spin tales and destroy communities for profit. Who take, take, take, and then leave when the damage is done. As Lizzo yells to the audience to make a pledge – “No fuckboys in 2020!” – it seems less like a dating resolution and more like a call to a revolution. Then she leads the audience through a mantra, a back and forth of positive affirmations: “We are receiving compliments now.” “You’re a good person.” She gets us to say “thank you” to ourselves and after we do, she tells all of us, “I’m proud of you, bitch.” It’s a week into 2020 and I really needed that. The one down note, for me, is when she waves a tiny Australian flag in solidarity. Note for Lizzo’s Australian contact – tell our sis about the Aboriginal flag, we can get her one. At the end of the night, her infamous instrument, Sasha Flute (an homage to Beyoncé’s alter ego, Sasha Fierce), comes out, and Lizzo is telling us it’s been her dream to play her flute at the Sydney Opera House. She twerks with the flute and it’s beautiful. I’ve been called fat my entire life. From kindergarten to high school, my fatness has been something I’ve been told to be ashamed of. My body is scarred from weight-loss surgeries. My skin sags and has stretch marks. I’ve been taught to see my body not as a gift but as a curse. So when I see Lizzo onstage, it feels revolutionary because when I look at her, all I see is beauty. Beauty that I want to see in myself. The fact I can see it in her makes me think one day I’ll see it in me. Her existence is a reminder to me that my existence is OK, that I have worth and value too. Sometimes the ability to make change can feel so far away it seems impossible. But change is happening. Lizzo is disrupting the centre, she’s challenging race, class, gender, sexuality, whiteness, blackness. She’s creating space for people to reclaim their worth in societies that have historically told them that they’re worthless. Lizzo’s is an energy that survived, cherished and revolted. It’s the same energy I’ve seen in all the Black women who raised me. She’s all the Black women who kept on loving despite being treated like they’re lesser or they’re nothing. It’s Big Aunty Energy. The only difference is now we get to see it. It isn’t pushed out of the spotlight; it’s onstage in black and gold sequins, playing a flute and twerking. • Lizzo is performing at the Forum, Melbourne, on Wednesday 8 January
The Police were a band that became notorious for bitter squabbles and proper fist fights but the drummer Stewart Copeland has insisted that he and Sting can get on famously – as long as they don’t play music together. The band split without any formal announcement in 1984 after five stratospherically successful albums and No 1 hits which included Walking on the Moon, Don’t Stand So Close to Me, and Every Breath You Take. It later emerged that Sting, Copeland and the guitarist Andy Summers were often at each other’s throats, verbally and physically. In an interview with Radio Times Copeland explained that the problem between himself and Sting was their different approaches to music. “For Sting, music was a painkiller, an anaesthetic, a way to escape from the evil, harsh, grim world, to a place of utter, unassailable, unblemished beauty,” he said. “For me, it’s a celebration: let’s light up this room and let’s have fun. “This can overlap – we made five albums as the Police. But the conflict grew and grew, out of that diversity of purpose. And now we understand that, and Sting and I get along famously … as long as we’re not playing music!” The Police have divided opinion since the first single Roxanne was released in 1978. Some see them as one of the greatest rock bands of all time. Others see them as one of the blandest. One huge fan is the award-winning choreographer Kate Prince, founder and artistic director of the hip-hop dance company ZooNation. She has created a new show opening in London next month using songs from the back catalogue of the Police and Sting. Copeland is exploring the whats and whys of music for a new three-part BBC Four series, Stewart Copeland’s Adventures in Music. He was asked about his feelings to other drummers, including one of the most influential and irascible of them all: Ginger Baker. “Oh, the guv’nor!” said Copeland. “I got along famously with Mr Baker. He called me Young Man, I called him Your Lordship.” They met at a polo game in Colorado, he said. Baker later went to Copeland’s studio in Hawaii and after one minute of playing became ill and paramedics were called. They tried to take him to hospital. “He told them to fuck off, then he played a show that night.”
Renato Franco Perversi and Irena Domowicz are squabbling over who does the better rendition of the Neapolitan classic, O Sole Mio. Perversi, 87, sings deep, while Domowicz, who says you must never ask a woman her age, immediately replicates the kind of performance she might have given during her career as a mezzo-soprano. “There is more theatre in here sometimes than in the outside world,” she joked. Hardly surprising. The pair are among the 60 retired opera stars playing out their days in an elegant mansion in Milan founded by the Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi. Verdi, famous for compositions including La Traviata, Aida and Otello, was in his 80s when he conceived the idea of a refuge for musicians who, he said, “are not favoured by fortune, or who, when they were young, did not possess the virtue of saving”. He did not want to be thanked for his generosity, and so stipulated that the home be opened after his death. The composer died in 1901, and the first nine guests moved into Casa Verdi a year later. For the next few decades, royalties from Verdi’s 27 works paid for the residents’ keep, including medical costs, and the building’s maintenance. Today most of the costs are covered by investments made by the Giuseppe Verdi Foundation, with residents paying according to their means. “The motives for which Giuseppe Verdi chose to build this house are still valid,” said Roberto Ruozi, president of the Giuseppe Verdi Foundation. “In the sense that there are numerous personalities who have dedicated their lives to music, who need to enter into a retirement home as they no longer have the economic means to sustain themselves, or who have complicated family lives.” Over the last 117 years, Casa Verdi has hosted 1,500 guests from across the musical spectrum, some of them famous, others less so. Perversi played the violin at La Scala for 10 years, while Domowicz toured with philharmonic orchestras across the globe. Another resident is 94-year-old Bissy Roman, a musicologist who was teaching well into her 70s. “Music is my life and I am very lucky to be here with other musicians,” said Roman. Casa Verdi is not so much of a “rest home” in the traditional sense. The sound of music is everywhere. On the morning the Guardian visited, guests were wrapping up a singing session around the piano. Instruments fill the rooms, including a wooden spinet gifted to Verdi to practise on as a child, while concerts are a regular occurrence. The home is also a museum to Verdi, containing items of his clothing, letters and paintings he commissioned from poor artists. The composer is nearby, having been laid to rest in Casa Verdi’s courtyard alongside his wife, the soprano Giuseppina Strepponi. Ever wondered why you feel so gloomy about the world - even at a time when humanity has never been this healthy and prosperous? Could it be because news is almost always grim, focusing on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame? This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come. Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com When the sculptor and politician, Giulio Monteverde, wrote in a letter to Verdi: “Tell me the truth. What is your favourite work?”, the maestro replied: “The home I built in Milan for retired musicians.” The only big alteration to Casa Verdi came in 1999, when it was opened up to 20 music students, an initiative aimed at assisting young people as well as bringing the generations together. The two groups mix and the older musicians give the young people invaluable guidance. “For the elderly people, the youngsters are injections of life and vice-versa, for the young people, the elderly are their teachers,” said Ruozi. Roman said that one of the best things about living in Casa Verdi was the students. Among her favourites is Corrado Neri, a 25-year-old singer and composer from Sicily. “When I first came to Milan I really struggled to find a place to stay and study,” said Neri, who through Roman’s connections has been collaborating with a music company in New York. “I had applied to Casa Verdi and two years later they called to say there was a place. It was the best thing that could have happened to me. These people are my family and best supporters, I have learned so much from them.” Perversi has been a resident since early 2016. “There are no words to describe Verdi’s generosity … we still feel him around us,” he said. “It’s an extraordinary place to live, and yes, even though these are our final days, Verdi has given us the possibility to live well.”
'Do something weird that works on TikTok': how to write a pop smash in 2020 Aimee Cliff 7-8 minutes Landing a No 1 single was a little different at the beginning of the 2010s than it is now. The songwriting and production team TMS – who have achieved both – fondly remember the limousine that was sent to pick them up from one of their mums’ houses and whisk them off to a West End party when they scored their first No 1 single with N Dubz rapper Dappy’s No Regrets in 2011. These days, there is less glamour. “It’s more like resetting the clock,” says Ben Kohn, laughing. “It’s kind of like you bought yourself another couple of years to not get a proper job.” Kohn, Tom Barnes and Peter Kelleher have been writing songs together since they were childhood friends, starting in a garden shed. Today, sitting down to chat in their Richmond studio, they speak excitedly over each other’s sentences as they discuss their latest chart topper, the anguished Lewis Capaldi ballad Someone You Loved. Getting to the top of the charts with Lewis in 2019, says Kelleher, was like “a shot in the arm”, as it had been four years since their last No 1 (Jess Glynne’s Don’t Be So Hard on Yourself). Barnes says that the rapid churn of the charts during the pre-streaming age made it much easier to take a new song to the top: “Back then, you’d probably get between 45 and 50 No 1s a year, whereas now you get 10.” “Around the Dappy time, you had pre-sales,” adds Kelleher. “Then you were fired up [the charts] in week one.” This decade of pop music has arguably seen more rapid change than any before it. The insatiable appetites of the digital age and the sheer quantity of music that fills out Spotify’s weekly New Music Friday playlist make it harder than ever to cut through the noise. So what is it like to be a professional hitmaker in such an unstable and competitive time? For Camille Purcell, who releases music as Kamille and writes for Little Mix, Clean Bandit and Mabel, these days it’s all about interesting beats, not hooks. “Five years ago, you had to have a massive chorus,” she says. “Now, it’s not the rule.” She cites the dominance of hip-hop as the cause of this trend towards more muted pop songs, because “those choruses are so simple, there’s nothing to them. The production is so minimal.” Kamille says she often takes inspiration from the “viral-led language” of social media posts and memes and that pop lyrics are becoming “so much more real and to the point – super conversational”. TMS’s Kohn agrees: “There was definitely a period when people were writing songs that were like Titanium,” he says, describing Sia’s heavily metaphorical tale of personal resilience as a “big themed song. Whereas now, I feel like the thing artists say a lot of the time is: ‘It’s got to sound like I’d actually say it.’” Major pop songs are also tackling different subjects than they did in the past, with mental health, politics and the idea of female empowerment all becoming common subjects of discussion in the writers’ room. MNEK, who, in addition to his own music, has writing credits for Beyoncé, Dua Lipa and Little Mix, believes it is important to tweak songs so that they become personal for the artist singing them. When his track IDGAF was picked up by Dua Lipa, for example, she went in the studio with him to rewrite the lyrics and make them more relevant for her. He also worked on OK (Anxiety Anthem) for Mabel’s 2019 debut album. “I was very proud that she was able to open up to me. That really strengthened our friendship,” he says. He compares writing sessions to therapy. “You build relationships with these artists.” Ali Tamposi – a Los Angeles-based writer who worked on Camila Cabello and Shawn Mendes’s Señorita – says this shift in subject matter reflects wider societal change. “The language is changing,” she says. “There’s been a huge surge in female empowerment. And I definitely feel that men are being way more vulnerable in the things they’re talking about. Artists are willing to talk about their weaknesses.” While the scope of pop’s themes has expanded, the time in which artists have to air them has shrunk: breaking through is no longer so much about making it on to a radio playlist as it is about the catching a listener’s ear before they hit skip – which, on Spotify, happens to a quarter of songs in the first five seconds. “I love 90s and 00s R&B, and those songs go on for ever,” says MNEK. “Songs these days don’t have that patience. We have so much access to everything now, it’s like, why would you wait a minute for a song to kick in?” TMS say they try not to think too much about skip rates when they are writing, but Kelleher notes: “In every era, there will be shortcuts that will help make a seven out of 10 into a hit, whether it’s beat pattern, drum sounds, ways of structuring songs. Songs on the top tier will succeed on their own merits, but there are definitely tips and tricks [for the others].” Some of those tricks include keeping on top of ever-changing trends – Kamille says she frequently begins her sessions by listening to playlists of current hits, taking stock of the musical landscape. She is also obsessed with TikTok, the video app that lets users lip-sync, which she says is teaching her about the “entertainment value of a song” – in other words, which bits of a hit can be turned into a meme: “I think about [adding] weird production parts, because that tends to really work on TikTok.” “In many respects, what people are looking for now is the weirdest stuff,” Kohn says. There’s no longer as much of a formula to scoring a mainstream pop hit as there might have been 10 years ago – and comparing the artists who went to No 1 this year shows a massive disparity in styles, from Lewis Capaldi to Lil Nas X to Billie Eilish. “Eilish is a brilliant example,” says Kohn. “If something just sounds like completely straight pop, its sound doesn’t go anywhere. In a way, there’s more pressure to be experimental.” Tamposi notes that a lot of the biggest hits of recent years have been a result of the internet age’s tendency to cross-pollinate genres. “Mixing urban with country, Latin with pop – people are taking more sonic risks. There’s no rules,” she says. That might make it harder to predict what will be a No 1 hit, but that’s the fun of it. “It makes creating so much more exciting, because we’re not trying to fit in this perfect pop box.” “That’s the interesting thing about pop music – the good pop music isn’t trying too hard to be pop music,” says Kohn. “The natural inclination when you start to write pop is almost to be a bit too cheesy. When we realised we could pour in all our hip-hop and breaks influences – that was when people started going: ‘This is pretty fun.’” The days of limousines calling at their mums’ houses may be over, but the joy of crafting a smash hit clearly isn’t.